===PAGE 1===
Zhou et al. Microsystems & Nanoengineering (2023) 9:116 
Microsystems & Nanoengineering
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41378-023-00562-8
www.nature.com/micronano
R E V I E W A R T I C L E
Op e n A c c e s s
Computer vision meets microﬂuidics: a label-free
method for high-throughput cell analysis
Shizheng Zhou1, Bingbing Chen1, Edgar S. Fu2 and Hong Yan
1✉
Abstract
In this paper, we review the integration of microﬂuidic chips and computer vision, which has great potential to
advance research in the life sciences and biology, particularly in the analysis of cell imaging data. Microﬂuidic chips
enable the generation of large amounts of visual data at the single-cell level, while computer vision techniques can
rapidly process and analyze these data to extract valuable information about cellular health and function. One of the
key advantages of this integrative approach is that it allows for noninvasive and low-damage cellular characterization,
which is important for studying delicate or fragile microbial cells. The use of microﬂuidic chips provides a highly
controlled environment for cell growth and manipulation, minimizes experimental variability and improves the
accuracy of data analysis. Computer vision can be used to recognize and analyze target species within heterogeneous
microbial populations, which is important for understanding the physiological status of cells in complex biological
systems. As hardware and artiﬁcial intelligence algorithms continue to improve, computer vision is expected to
become an increasingly powerful tool for in situ cell analysis. The use of microelectromechanical devices in
combination with microﬂuidic chips and computer vision could enable the development of label-free, automatic, low-
cost, and fast cellular information recognition and the high-throughput analysis of cellular responses to different
compounds, for broad applications in ﬁelds such as drug discovery, diagnostics, and personalized medicine.
Introduction
With
the
rapid
advancement
of
interdisciplinary
research in micromanufacturing, microelectromechanical
system (MEMS) and life science, the fabrication of
microﬂuidic devices has increasingly attracted interna-
tional attention in the biotechnological ﬁeld. Various cell
detection devices, such as electrodes, optics and acoustics,
can be integrated on a microﬂuidic chip, and the structure
and function of the chip can be ﬂexibly designed1, which
can not only meet the needs of various types of cell
analyses but also enable the visualization of single-cell
information. Moreover, a series of operating steps,
including
sample
preparation,
reaction,
separation,
detection, cell culture, sorting, lysis and so on, which are
available in chemical and biological labs, are miniaturized
into one microﬂuidic chip to achieve high-throughput and
high-speed detection.
Cell analysis is a complicated process that involves
various cell types and multiple biological reactions
through different temporal and spatial dimensions2. Even
in the same physical environments and culture conditions
and with the same external stimuli, microbial cells from
the same metrocyte may have remarkable variation in
terms of size, growth rate, morphology and phenotype.
Traditional cell assay methods, such as enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA)3, quantitative polymerase
chain reaction (qPCR)4 and other common bioassays, can
provide unique insights into molecular biology and cell
biology.
However,
these
methods
seem
to
neglect
important cell morphology and cell state information and
are thus unable to elucidate biological phenomena or
accidental events caused by cellular interactions. There-
fore, the analysis of cell composition, structure and
© The Author(s) 2023
OpenAccessThisarticleislicensedunderaCreativeCommonsAttribution4.0InternationalLicense,whichpermitsuse,sharing,adaptation,distributionandreproduction
in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if
changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If
material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain
permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
Correspondence: Hong Yan (yanhong@hainanu.edu.cn)
1State Key Laboratory of Marine Resource Utilization in South China Sea,
Hainan University, Haikou 570228, China
2Graduate School of Computing and Information Science, University of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15260, USA
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;

===PAGE 2===
morphology at the single-cell level is of critical impor-
tance, not only for the exploration of cell heterogeneity
but also for the discovery of interactions among cells and
between cells and the environment. It enables us to
comprehensively understand the behavior of cells, tissues,
organs and even whole life forms.
Optical imaging has been the most direct way to observe
microbes at the single-cell level since the invention of
microscopes by Antony van Leeuwenhoek in the mid-17th
century. Currently, microscopic observation has become a
routine procedure for biological scientists and bioengi-
neers to examine cell images and determine their viability.
Common imaging methods include optical bright ﬁeld
microscopy,
ﬂuorescence
microscopy,
confocal
laser
scanning microscopy, super resolution imaging, lensless
microscopy and so on. Cellular or subcellular features are
associated with characteristic structures and functions of
living systems and play an important role in cell iden-
tity5–8. Cell images obtained through microscopic imaging
contain a large amount of cellular information, such as
size, morphology, texture, internal structure. As opposed
to the traditional single variable cell analysis method, the
main advantage of image-based cell analysis lies in its
ability to implement high-throughput screening for single-
cell and multivariable imaging analysis. For example, in
drug screening, visual cellular data can be interpreted to
determine cell phenotypes, drug-induced gene expression
and protein localization, to predict phenotypic changes in
cytoskeleton structure and to implement high-throughput
screening for variable single-cell imaging6,9.
The development of imaging technology has led to
image quality enhancement that enables more informa-
tion, including subtle phenotypic changes of cells that are
difﬁcult to recognize by the human eye, to be obtained
from individual images. At the single-cell level, images
may contain a large amount of cell morphological and
spatial information. However, only a small part of this
information can be extracted from cell images using
manual analysis due to the large amount of data. Thus,
there is an urgent need for the development of hardware
and algorithms to provide a real-time data mining and
visualization platform for computerized cell visual analy-
sis. The overwhelming information content and the
growing data volume call for automated image analysis
methods with upgraded information content. In recent
years, computer vision algorithms have been widely used
in biological image processing and analysis to overcome
the bottleneck caused by the explosion of data growth
since they are able to extract and analyze massive visual
information from cell images10–12. Computer vision is a
branch of artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) that uses algorithms
to mimic the way the that the human visual system
acquires,
processes,
analyzes
and
synthesizes
visual
information. The human visual cortex is composed of
over 140 million neurons and is capable of unrivaled
visual perception by segmentation and integration of
visual data relayed from the retina, as well as by instan-
taneous recognition of objects and patterns (Fig. 1). Light
signals are converted into electrical signals on the retina
and transmitted to the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN).
Raw image
Data preprocessing / Data augmentation
Deep learning neural network
Prediction
Decision
Neutrophil
erythrocyte
Neutrophil
erythrocyte
LGN
Computer vision
Eye
LGN
Human
V1
V2
V4
PIT
CIT
AIT
AIT
CIT PIT
V4
V2
V1
V3
Fig. 1 Cell recognition through the human eyes and brain and computer vision. PIT: posterior IT, CIT: central IT, AIT: anterior IT
Zhou et al. Microsystems & Nanoengineering (2023) 9:116 
Page 2 of 15

===PAGE 3===
This process is similar to the image preprocessing and
image enhancement processes in computer vision, which
facilitates the recognition and extraction of targeted
object features in the image. The LGN then transmits the
signals to the visual cortex (including V1, V2 and V4) and
the inferior temporal (IT) cortex to further reﬁne the
signals, extract the color, shape and movement informa-
tion, and make conclusions. This process is similar to the
image recognition process of a deep learning neural net-
work, where the neural network extracts the feature
information layer by layer and ﬁnally outputs the classi-
ﬁcation probability of each category. For the ﬁve senses
that the human brain possesses, vision plays a major role
that involves >50% of the brain’s computational space
directly or indirectly for constant visual processing and
integration. Humans use more neurons for vision than the
other four types combined. This is the reason why human
vision is so powerful. In comparison, computer vision is
still in an immature stage of development with respect to
visual perception.
Although AI-based image recognition is not yet matching
the human and computer vision still lags behind the human
visual cortex thus far, we argue that when computer vision
algorithms are integrated with microﬂuidic technology in
cell data acquisition, the integration of computer vision with
miniaturized microﬂuidic devices is somewhat superior in
cell imaging analysis to human intelligence. The reason is
that even though image recognition in the visual cortex is
more advanced than its artiﬁcial counterparts, the human
eye is the bottleneck for information ﬂow from microscopic
objects to the retina. On the other hand, microﬂuidic chips
for cells are capable of generating much more information
intense visual data at the micrometer and even nanometer
level for subsequent computer vision equipped with artiﬁ-
cial neural networks to learn, analyze and recognize visual
information.
This review will be conducted with the abovementioned
theme to show that the combination of computer vision
and microﬂuidics will not only promote the real-time
detection of single cells but also enable more accurate and
robust processing of high-throughput visual data. Com-
puter vision algorithms can precisely overcome the ana-
lytic difﬁculty of microﬂuidic technology and make the
analytic results more accurate and robust, providing a
promising AI-aided cell visual data generation and
information acquisition method in the ﬁelds of life science
and biotechnology. This review will discuss the principles
and related applications of computer vision and micro-
ﬂuidics and provide an outlook on the future development
of this interdisciplinary research.
Computer vision for cell analysis
There are four basic tasks in the ﬁeld of computer
vision, including classiﬁcation, location, detection and
segmentation, as shown in Fig. 2a. Since an image is a
matrix composed of pixel values, traditional computer
vision methods can extract features from an image to
distinguished it from other classes of images, such as size,
deformation, brightness, edge, texture and color, allowing
the computer “understand” the image. These features are
expressed in the form of numerical values, vectors, and
symbols. Algorithm optimization and feature engineering
for speciﬁc cells is a challenging task. Tuned feature
extraction algorithms have a small amount of computa-
tion and fast processing speed and can handle high-
throughput and relatively simple image processing tasks.
However, they are not sufﬁcient in terms of addressing
global feature changes and local context changes. In
recent years, with the improvement of computing power
and artiﬁcial intelligence algorithms, neural networks
have been widely used in practice. A neural network
consists of several neurons that are divided into several
layers, including an input layer, a hidden layer, and an
output layer for classiﬁcation or prediction.
To make neural networks more suitable for image
analysis, researchers proposed convolutional neural net-
works (CNNs)13,14, and the architecture of CNNs was
inspired
by
the
visual
data
processing
mechanism
underlying the human visual cortex. Convolutional neural
networks use convolutional kernels to process local image
information in the form of a matrix and are the most
mainstream neural network in the ﬁeld of computer
vision. Convolutional neural networks are composed of
convolutional layers containing multiple convolutional
cores. It can directly learn the features at the pixel level of
a cellular images. The receptive ﬁeld of the front con-
volutional layer is small, and most of the captured and
calculated images are local information with picture
details, while the back convolutional layer increases layer
by layer to capture more complex and abstract informa-
tion of the image (Fig. 2b). Convolutional neural networks
identify objects through their ability to extract more
abstract features, and can capture more variations and
details of visual stimuli and perform more complex cell
image analysis tasks.
Exploration of computer vision in microﬂuidic cell
analysis
Currently, the development of microﬂuidic technology is
at a pace where it produces more data than researchers are
able to analyze, especially in the cell imaging area using
microﬂuidic cell analysis. Computer vision algorithms can
precisely solve this bottleneck with the aid of microﬂuidic
technology. With their excellent feature extraction and
generalizability, computer vision algorithms have been
widely used in the development of cell characterization in
microﬂuidic cytometry, cell detection on chips, cell growth
analysis, drug screening and point-of-care tests.
Zhou et al. Microsystems & Nanoengineering (2023) 9:116 
Page 3 of 15

===PAGE 4===
Cell characterization in microﬂuidic cytometry
The biophysical features of cells reﬂect their identities,
which are fundamental to maintain their homeostatic
state in health and play a deﬁning role in the pathogenesis
of disease15. Biophysical cytometry is a technique used to
analyze the physical features of cells, including their size,
shape, deformability, and mechanical properties16. It can
reveal subtle spatial and temporal variations in the bio-
physical phenotype of cells and their correlation with
cellular function.
Traditional computer vision techniques have been used
in cell characterization for several decades17, and they
remain a valuable tool for analyzing cell images, offering
advantages such as ﬂexibility, interpretability and com-
putational
efﬁciency.
Traditional
computer
vision
algorithm-assisted label-free microﬂuidic imaging cyto-
metry and deformability cytometry can achieve extremely
high cell throughput18–20. Microﬂuidic chips offer a
microfabricated detection region with ﬁne-tuned geome-
trical properties21 and ensure that only a single cell is
present in the ﬁeld of view at any given time by enabling
the precise control and manipulation of ﬂuids at the
microscale level22,23. This allows for the acquisition of
high-quality images of individual cells, and for the
extraction of detailed information of spatial and temporal
features.
Deformability
cytometry
enables
high-
throughput detection of both static and dynamic cellular
mechanical phenotypes and has been widely applied in
various ﬁelds, including cancer research, stem cell dif-
ferentiation18,
and
blood
testing24–26.
Currently,
constriction-based deformability cytometry (cDC), shear
ﬂow deformability cytometry (sDC) and extensional ﬂow
deformability cytometry (xDC) are mainly used23, as
shown in Fig. 3a.
When applying traditional computer vision methods to
microﬂuidic imaging cytometry, the general steps are
image acquisition, preprocessing, segmentation, feature
extraction and analysis. Many of these processes can be
implemented
through
the
computer
vision
library
OpenCV (https://opencv.org/). The most popular method
in imaging ﬂow cytometry is to convert a single-cell image
into a binary map and then perform threshold segmen-
tation to distinguish the cell from the background and
extract spatially-based biophysical features by means of
built-in functions or ﬁne-tuned feature engineering,
including cell size, perimeter, circularity, area, deforma-
tion, uniformity, density and so on, as shown in Fig. 3b.
The above steps can be carried out in turn with the
a
b
Platelets, RBC, WBC
RBC
RBC
RBC
RBC
WBC
RBC
RBC
Platelets
Platelets
WBC
RBC
WBC
RBC
RBC
Platelets
(i) Image classification
(ii) Object detection
(iii) Semantic segmentation
(iv) Instance segmentation
Pool
Conv
Conv
Fully connected
Conv
Pool
0.96 Cell periphery
0.01 Cytoplasm
0.01 Vacuole
Fig. 2 Computer vision for image analysis. a Four major applications in the ﬁeld of computer vision. (i) input an image and determine the class to
which the image belongs; (ii) detect all objects in an image, determine their classes and locate the positions of the objects; (iii) on the basis of object
detection, semantic segmentation requires further determination of which pixels belong to a class in an image; (iv) determine which pixels each
object contains on the basis of object detection; b Convolutional neural network for cell feature extraction and classiﬁcation. CNN can detect the
features of corners, edges, and lines in the ﬁrst layers, and its middle layer represents a combination of these low-level features, while at deeper levels,
there are features that give the most weight to the cells that need to be separated, such as the membrane structure and dot patterns120,121
Zhou et al. Microsystems & Nanoengineering (2023) 9:116 
Page 4 of 15

===PAGE 5===
OpenCV functions ‘threshold’ and ‘ﬁndContours’. In
addition, the ‘moment’ and ‘HuMoment’ functions can be
used to extract the moments and Hu moments, respec-
tively, to calculate features such as the centroid and
orientation
and
for
more
comprehensive
shape
recognition.
The temporal deformation features of cells can be rea-
lized by setting multiple ROIs in a channel for continuous
cell tracking. Fregin et al. captured the full dynamics of
suspended cells passing a centralized construction of a
microﬂuidic channel on-the-ﬂy by sDC, determining the
apparent Young’s modulus and apparent viscosity with
throughput rates of up to 100 cells per second27,28, as
shown in Fig. 3c. The integrability of microﬂuidics allows
the integration of other physical ﬁelds on a chip to sti-
mulate cells for short-time transient responses. Although
this research has not yet achieved high throughput, the
technique
is
promising
in
terms
of
uncovering
physiological responses of single cells by characterizing
the temporal and spatial biophysical features in real time
and tracking cell cycle stages.
Deep learning offers the potential to extract hidden
information from images captured by imaging ﬂow cyto-
metry29. Unlike traditional computer vision methods,
deep learning methods do not require to predeﬁne the
morphological features to be included in the analysis and
do not search for the optimal combination of features in a
feature set. It will avoid biased analysis, allow the
exploration of potential relationships between different
phenotypes and aid in the discovery of the heterogeneity
of
cell
types15,30,31.
Although
achieving
detection
throughput comparable to that of traditional image pro-
cessing methods is not yet possible through the combi-
nation
of
deep
learning
methods
and
microﬂuidic
cytometry, this approach is still very promising, especially
in
terms
of
obtaining
a
deeper
understanding
of
a
c
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
1
2
3
4
5
1
2000
1960
1920
1880
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
2
3
4
5
Time (s)
10 µm
10 µm
Frequency (Hz)
Passage time
b
Area ratio=
=
=
=
Hull area
Raw area
Area A & area ratio
A
rf
rf
Front
radius
Axes ratio Ra
Taylor deformation dT
r ()
r ()
(r) – (r)
(r) – (r)
(r)+(r)
(r)+(r)
dT
Lx – Ly
Lx + Ly
Principal axes ratio Rpa
Rpa
Rescaled circularity c*
c* = 1 – c
A

P
1– 2
=
Inv. Haralick's circularity cH
–1
Normalized front radius Rf
–1
Rf
–1
cH
–1
(r )
(r )
cvar
2(r)
(r)
(r)
2(r)
Circular variance cvar
Inertia ratio Ri
4
4
COM
Raw area
Hull area (Area A)
Ly
Lx
Ly
Lx
Ly
a
b
Lx
Perimeter P
y
x
y
x
y
=
=
=
Ri
x
y
=
Ra
x
Area A
t1
t2
t3
tn
Flow direction
Fig. 3 Traditional computer vision algorithm-assisted microﬂuidic cytometry. a The three main types of deformability cytometry23. (i) cDC measured
the time needed for cells to pass through the constricted channel; (ii) sDC and (iii) xDC use hydrodynamic ﬂow to induce cell deformation without
direct contact and infer cell deformability from the image-based evaluation of cell shape. b Nine common shape descriptors27. They are used to
measure the degree of deformation of cells after being focused by the buffer. Different features are selected to construct a scatter plot that shows the
ranges of features of different cell classes. c Dynamic tracking of single cells in a microﬂuidic channel28. Multiple ROIs are set up in the channels to
collect time series images of cellular deformation
Zhou et al. Microsystems & Nanoengineering (2023) 9:116 
Page 5 of 15

===PAGE 6===
biophysical cellular heterogeneity and revealing sig-
niﬁcant biophysical biomarkers of health and disease.
Cell detection and classiﬁcation on a chip
Different from external physical ﬁelds such as sound,
electricity and magnetism, the optical imaging system on
a microﬂuidic platform can intuitively obtain the internal
structure and phenotypic features of each cell with almost
no damage to the cells. The characteristics of miniatur-
ized microﬂuidic chips with high integration make them
an ideal platform to automatically analyze cell image or
video data combined with computer vision-related tech-
nologies, providing a tool to automatically analyze cell
image or video data combined with computer vision
methods32.
The integration of computer vision and microﬂuidic
chips makes it possible to realize cell detection, cell
identiﬁcation and cell sorting on a chip. Before sorting, it
is necessary to fully understand the features of each cell,
which can be adequately learned from previous cell ima-
ging data. After extracting the cell characteristics, the
software transmits the sorting signal to a sorting device to
implement the sorting process. Cell image segmentation
methods based on feature engineering mainly include
threshold segmentation33,34, watershed algorithms35–37,
and edge detection38–40. Unlike those of the single-cell
images generated by imaging ﬂow cytometry with a uni-
form background, general image classiﬁcation tasks have a
high level of background noise and multiple objects,
which
makes
traditional
algorithms
require
time-
consuming tuning processes, and they are less robust to
environmental perturbations.
The advantage of using CNNs for cell classiﬁcation is
that they enable feature extraction and encapsulation
without requiring user to concern about the speciﬁc fea-
ture treatment process, and their portability has allowed
them to be widely used in the ﬁeld of microﬂuidic cell
classiﬁcation. Nitta et al. proposed an Intelligent Image-
activated Cell Sorting system (iIACS) based on a CNN
architecture that is capable of sorting cells according to
cell images in real time. The system integrates a high-
speed ﬂuorescence microscope, a 3D two-step hydraulic
focus microﬂuidic chip, and the dual-membrane pumps to
enable real-time and automated ﬂuid focusing, cell
detection, and cell sorting. It allows the real-time sorting
of microalgae and blood cells based on intracellular pro-
tein localization and cell‒cell interactions41,42. Based on
iIACS, the authors changed the cellular imaging method
to an image-sensor-based optomechanical ﬂow imaging
method and upgraded the system hardware to obtain
higher quality cell images and faster processing speed43.
In another case, Chen et al. developed an optomechanical
scanning imaging m ethod to quickly transmit cell signals,
reconstruct cell images through a ﬁeld-programmable
gate array (FPGA), and transfer the reconstructed cell
image to the CPU for image feature extraction and cell
classiﬁcation44. The study by Godino et al. demonstrated
a precise single-cell manipulation technique in which an
automated cell sorting device was fabricated using an
open-source package in the ﬁeld of computer vision to
recognize cell color and manipulate cell movement
through dielectrophoresis under bright ﬁeld imaging45.
Nawaz et al. used surface acoustic waves to manipulate
cells and accurately sort single cells based on the output
of deep neural networks46. Girault et al. developed a label-
free microﬂuidic droplet sorting system based on droplet
images. In their system, a high-speed camera was used to
capture the cells in the droplets in each frame and
recognize their boundaries. Then, computer vision was
used to recognize the cell images based on the morpho-
logical characteristics of the objects in the droplets and to
sort the droplets of interest through direct current
pulses47,48.
Cell detection and counting with microﬂuidic chips is
characterized by fast and high throughput and the large-
scale imaging of cells in chip channels; in particular, cells
in the ﬁeld of view are detected and counted automatically
in real time by computer vision technology. Heo et al.
proposed a fast image-processing pipeline (R-MOD: Real-
time Moving Object Detector) based on CNNs to acquire
and analyze cell images through monitoring microﬂuidic
channels
real-time49.
They
also
added
a
syringe-
connected piezo actuator to enable rapid cell sorting
after detecting and counting cells50, as shown in Fig. 4a.
Here, computer vision and microﬂuidics were applied to
detect multiple cells in the ﬁeld of view and to maintain
high-throughput detection by increasing the concentra-
tion of the cell solution at a low ﬂow rate. Transferring
algorithms from the ﬁeld of pattern recognition to
microﬂuidic cell detection is promising. For example, the
You Only Look Once (YOLO) series of algorithms51–53,
which are lightweight, modular and fast, have been used
for droplet54,55, cellular viability56 and circulating tumor
cells (CTCs) detection57. It can also be integrated with
other algorithms to achieve different assay functions, as
shown in Fig. 4b. The dynamic processes of a cell are
recorded in multiframe images, which is important for
rare cell characterization. It should be noted that real-
time detection using computer vision described above did
not involve additional channels or syringe pumps to focus
the cell solution because the cells ﬂowing through the
channel without a serial arrangement were well detected
and identiﬁed by the object detection algorithm in com-
puter vision.
The performance of the image sensor of the microscope
camera determines the resolution of the collected cell
images. Some cell substructures need to be displayed as
high-resolution images. The lensless microscope imaging
Zhou et al. Microsystems & Nanoengineering (2023) 9:116 
Page 6 of 15

===PAGE 7===
method is not bound by the microscope lens and can
achieve high-resolution imaging in a large ﬁeld of view58.
It acquires the digital signals of cell samples through the
sensor and reconstructs them into a high-resolution
image through a CNN to realize the rapid detection of
the cells59–61. In recent years, some researchers have
applied
lensless
microscopic
imaging
technology
to
microﬂuidic cell analysis. Gӧrӧcs et al. developed a real-
time water detection device to display the ﬂow of the
diffraction patterns of microorganisms in microﬂuidic
channels through lensless holographic microscopy. A
holographic diffraction pattern was established in real
time by using the phase recovery and image reconstruc-
tion method in computer vision, and chromatic image of
individual microorganisms were captured. The method is
low cost and portable and achieves high-throughput
continuous monitoring of marine microorganism groups;
for example, it can obtain the composition of phyto-
plankton in the ocean62, as shown in Fig. 4c. Singh et al.
developed a microﬂuidic system for online digital holo-
graphic microscopic imaging that was able to detect and
identify CTCs in the blood at a rate of 10,000 cells
per second without cellular labeling63. Luo et al. com-
bined mobile lensless microscopy with deep learning to
automatically measure levels of highly sensitive C-reactive
protein in human serum samples64. The lensless micro-
ﬂuidic system can quickly obtain high-quality single-cell
images without limiting the throughput of the system,
providing an economical, effective and portable solution
for real-time diagnosis.
The massive imaging datasets generated by microﬂuidic
chips meet the demands of neural networks that rely on
large amounts of training data for accuracy. The “big data”
feature and the ability to sort cells with microﬂuidics
a
b
c
Detection
Tracking
Image binarization
Cropping
Output:cell type
and location
Sorting
decision
Bright field image
Binary image
CNN
classifier
Processed image
Collection
Waste
Expand
Pushing
force
+ V
Enclosure
Pump
Outlet
Inlet
Mirror
Microchip
Sensor
LED
Spectral
filters
Recon-
struction
Flow direction
ROI
Observation
Cells classification
& location
Object detection
model
Input
Fn
Fn+1
Fn+x
Time
Fn Fn+1
Fn+x
CTC
70 µm
70 µm
140 µm
140 µm
100 µm
50 µm
50 µm
100 µm
a-8
a-9
a-2
a-3
b-8
b-9
b-2
b-3
RBC
WBC
Muti-frame
association
Classificaion
correction
Fig. 4 On-chip cell detection and classiﬁcation with computer vision technologies. a CV-based image-activated microﬂuidic cell sorting50. Image
segmentation algorithms and object detection neural networks in computer vision were applied to quickly collect cell images in a high-throughput
manner and output the sorting decision to the downstream piezoelectric actuator. b The YOLOv4 algorithm with multiframe image correlation to
detect CTCs in a sheathless and label-free manner. Multiple frames of a cell in the ﬂow channel can reﬂect the phenotype of that cell from multiple
perspectives, and together, these images are used to make classiﬁcation decisions, greatly improving the accuracy of cell classiﬁcation as well as the
robustness of the model. c Lensless portable ﬂow cytometer for natural water analysis62. This device uses a partially coherent lensless holographic
microscope to capture images with diffraction patterns of ﬂowing objects in microchannels and then converts these diffraction patterns into
chromatic variations for a deep learning neural network to be trained for the classiﬁcation and identiﬁcation of algae
Zhou et al. Microsystems & Nanoengineering (2023) 9:116 
Page 7 of 15

===PAGE 8===
based on image features marks an important milestone for
the integration of computer vision and microﬂuidic chips
as an important tool for enabling AI-based research in life
science
and
biomedicine.
For
example,
biomedical
research can rely on massive image features from
microﬂuidics to understand cell behaviors and ﬁnd their
relations between phenotype and genotype. With algo-
rithm and computing power updates, the image detection
and feature extraction abilities of computer vision will
make its applications in microﬂuidic cell analysis more
intelligent.
Cell growth assessment on a chip
Cell growth assessment is an important task in biolo-
gical research to obtain a deeper understanding of cellular
activities such as the cell life cycle, cell growth, metabo-
lism and cell population communication. It includes the
assessment of cell viability, the living or dead state of cells
in the cell community, the cell growth cycle, and the
possibility of cell survival under environmental stress.
Compared with that of the entire microbial population,
the assessment of cell growth status at the individual cell
level can provide more detailed information65.
Microﬂuidics are fast, efﬁcient and economically effec-
tive as a cell growth detection platform. They can detect
the status of cell metabolism to observe the cell phenotype
at the single-cell level and to create a chemical and phy-
sical microenvironment for cells by fully manipulating the
ﬂuid inside and out. A microﬂuidic device can also allow
cell culture experiments with different concentration
gradients or pH gradients through solution exchange in
the microchannel. Whether at the single-cell level or in
the cell population, cell image analysis through computer
vision can intuitively detect cell morphological changes
during cell growth or environmental variation with much
lower costs66 compared to that of electrochemical detec-
tion and other methods. Jagannadh et al. demonstrated a
portable bright-ﬁeld imaging system based on a micro-
ﬂuidic chip to detect the cell viability of yeast cells67. Even
using low frame rate imaging equipment, computer vision
algorithms were able to automatically segment the cell
images in real time, extract cell features, and evaluate the
effects of the elimination, absorption and retention of
dyes. They were even able to quantify the dead cells from
a large number of viable cells. Kim et al. proposed a new
computer-vision-based method to estimate the viability of
bacteria in a microﬂuidic channel using fast Fourier
transform to detect the frequency alteration of a micro-
scopic image68. By analyzing the frequency of time-lapse
images, the regional concentration changes of bacteria
cultured under an antibiotic gradient were detected. Chen
et al. used CNNs to automatically collect and segment
tumor cell images of cell cultures on a microﬂuidic chip69.
By associating the cell shapes in the early cell growth
phase with those in the ﬁnal phase, the CNN model was
able to predict whether a cell would eventually form a
tumor sphere from the cell growth images from the fourth
day, which greatly reduced the time required for medical
oncology experiments. It was also observed that computer
vision with microﬂuidics can be used to assess the degree
of cell division cycle and cell differentiation, which has
been mentioned in more than one study70,71.
Drug screening on a chip
Unlike traditional well plate cell culture methods,
microﬂuidics provide the ability to manipulate cells and
maintain a controlled environment for cell growth in a
three-dimensional
environment.
The
thousands
of
microchambers on a chip allow high-throughput drug
testing
and
screening
for
biomedical
investigations.
Although there are many applications for drug screening
through microﬂuidic platforms6,72, progress has been slow
in large-scale drug screening. One of the main bottlenecks
is the lack of a fast and low-cost read-out method to
screen drugs. In recent years, the emergence of computer
vision methods has gradually overcome this obstacle.
Drug screening based on cell phenotype has become a
trend in drug discovery, which is an unbiased screening to
predict and discover compounds that induce cell pheno-
type changes in a cell growth environment. Research
shows that these drug screening methods have discovered
more new drugs than targeted drug screening based on
speciﬁc targets or mechanisms73. Zhang et al. developed a
microﬂuidic platform that can culture three-dimensional
tumor cells for cell growth assessment and drug screening
(Fig. 5a). This platform can perform automatic image
acquisition and cropping74. By training bright-ﬁeld images
of three-dimensional tumor cells, a CNN model predicted
and estimated the viability of 3D tumor cell spheroids and
accurately evaluated the efﬁcacy of three chemother-
apeutic drugs.
The crystallization screening of pharmaceutical active
ingredients is another important drug discovery approach
in the pharmaceutical industry, where microﬂuidic tech-
nology provides a new method for the high-throughput
screening of pharmaceutical crystallization. Although it
has the advantages of low sample consumption, less time
consumption, and increased throughput, there are still
some problems that need to be solved. For example,
extracting useful information from a large amount of data
requires long-term and tedious labor. To overcome these
hurdles, Su et al. proposed a high-throughput system that
combines microﬂuidic hydrogel droplet platforms with
computer vision to screen drug crystallization conditions
(Fig. 5b). This system uses a CNN to identify and classify
hundreds of indomethacin crystal images and successfully
determines the antisolvent crystallization conditions for
three indomethacin crystals75.
Zhou et al. Microsystems & Nanoengineering (2023) 9:116 
Page 8 of 15

===PAGE 9===
The abuse of antibiotics has promoted the evolution of
drug-resistant bacteria. To address this threat, the devel-
opment of novel and speciﬁc antibiotics is crucial and
requires timely antibiotic sensitivity testing. The drug
susceptibility testing microﬂuidic (DSTM) system devel-
oped by Matsumoto et al. used image analysis software to
detect the difference in the number and shape of drug-
treated cells. It was found that this method was able to
quickly detect the drug sensitivity of Pseudomonas aeru-
ginosa76. Yu et al. performed real-time imaging of freely
moving bacterial cells in urine and used deep learning
algorithms to automatically analyze various phenotypic
features and responses of the cells in videos. By learning
multiple phenotypic features of cells, researchers can
determine whether bacterial cells are inhibited by anti-
biotics without the need to deﬁne and quantify each fea-
ture77. It is obvious that computer vision neural networks
have great potential in drug screening since high-
throughput microﬂuidic systems are able to deﬁne and
quantify every feature of the cells in massive 3D cell image
acquisition for the CV neural networks to use as
training data.
It is possible to obtain a variety of phenotypic features of
individual cells, including cell size, morphology, move-
ment and division, using computer vision methods to
analyze cell images under the action of drugs. Cells
dynamically grow, change shape, divide, rotate and move
over time. Using conventional computer vision techni-
ques by deﬁning and quantifying these features, their
extremely short processing speed promises the ability to
enable real-time characterization oriented toward high-
volume cell cultures, as shown in Fig. 5c, where conven-
tional computer vision algorithms show advantages in
ultralarge-scale high-resolution imaging78.
Point-of-care testing
The global SARS-CoV-2 pandemic has led to a high
demand for point-of-care testing (POCT) devices79.
Microﬂuidic POCT platforms simplify analyses by inte-
grating multiple procedures, such as sampling, chemical
reactions, chromatographic separation and detection into
a small chip, enabling multiple analyses and providing a
“sample-in-answer-out” function80,81. Accurate and sen-
sitive signal readout methods are essential for addressing
Field of view
1.0cm × 1.1cm 
50 µm
t = 4.2 s
Convolutional neural network
Drug inhibition score
Six drug conditions
Tumor sphere culture
chip array
Ground truth
Prediction
Drug efficacy estimation
Conv 
layers
Region proposal 
networks
Feature maps
ROI pooling
Proposals
Raw images
Classes; location
Cell #
Cell #
0s
35s
Time (s)
1
N
5s
0
20
10
0s
30s
10s
20s
Time (s)
Sheet
Sheet: 98%
Sheet: 97%
Sheet: 97%
Sheet: 94%
Sheet: 97%
Sheet: 92%
a
b
c
Fig. 5 CV-based drug screening system. a Prediction of the therapeutic effect of drugs on tumor spheres by a convolutional neural network74. The
chip can simultaneously test six drug conditions and capture bright-ﬁeld images and live/dead cell staining images of tumor cells after drug
treatment. The bright-ﬁeld images are input into a convolutional neural network to predict the viability of cells, and the living/dead cell staining
images are used as the true values to evaluate the accuracy of the prediction results. b Combination of a hydrogel droplet platform and computer
vision to screen the antisolvent crystallization conditions of active pharmaceutical ingredients75. The method collects images of hydrogel droplets
containing different drug crystals in serpentine channels and detects different drug crystal shapes in the hydrogel droplets by using an object
detection algorithm. c Real-time drug screening by ultralarge-scale high-resolution imaging and computer vision. Video clips of Ca2+ ion signals in
cells are recorded at 30 Hz and then analyzed ofﬂine. Within each region of interest, all image frames are accumulated to synthesize a grayscale map,
and individual cells are then identiﬁed by the binarization algorithm ImageJ. The ﬂuorescence intensity of these cells in each frame are extracted and
resolved, revealing the rhythmic response of cardiomyocytes following drug injection78
Zhou et al. Microsystems & Nanoengineering (2023) 9:116 
Page 9 of 15

===PAGE 10===
analytical sensing, cost and operational difﬁculties and
determining the practical applications of analytical sen-
sing strategies, and the use of simpliﬁed but accurate
readout methods is important for microﬂuidic instanta-
neous analytical sensing devices82,83. In Fig. 6a, Chen et al.
ingeniously designed aptamer-functionalized barcodes
and microﬂuidic chips. Various aptamers to multiple
target exosomes can be encoded by the characteristic
reﬂection peaks of barcodes, and the results of multiple
detection of exosomes can be read by the photonic signals
of the highly sensitive barcodes, which are represented as
different brilliant structural colors under a camera84.
The availability of inexpensive imaging technology such
as Raspberry Pi has lowered the barriers to accessing cost-
efﬁcient and objective detection methodologies, and they
can be interfaced with ﬂexible software that is capable of
a
b
c
Bright field
image
Fluorescent
image
Control
Input: raw image
Output: position,class,
contour
Class box
Sample
RGB feature extraction
Random forest
model
CCD
camera
Laser
transmitter
Raspberry Pi
Lighting
system
Camera module
RolAlign
Mask R-CNN
Conv
Conv
pH = 7
R
G
B
Fig. 6 CV-assisted point-of-care testing devices. a Herringbone microﬂuidics for multiple exosome detection84. The detection of exosomes can be
simpliﬁed to read the photonic signals of barcodes with the imaging of charge-coupled-device and the digital image processing methods to achieve
higher sensitivity and accuracy. b A mobile device supported by machine learning for high-precision pH classiﬁcation88. The color values from
individual components are extracted by multiple traditional image processing techniques, such as gray/HSV conversion, histogram equalization and
blurring, and calculating the difference in the vector space can improve the precision of pH classiﬁcation. c A low-cost system for high-precision
detection of C. elegans96. This system utilizes a Mask R-CNN to automatically detect C. elegans in an end-to-end manner, which yields reliable and
precise location information. The neural network structure has been optimized and supported by hardware and software platforms, making it easy to
deploy on mobile devices for a wide range of bioanalytical tasks
Zhou et al. Microsystems & Nanoengineering (2023) 9:116 
Page 10 of 15

===PAGE 11===
performing image segmentation and probing a variety of
color spaces. However, this approach is unsuitable when
the response is complex and irregular85. The computa-
tional capacity of integrated circuit chips has increased
signiﬁcantly, greatly enhancing digital signal processing
and image processing capabilities. The lightweight trend
in neural network research has led to the widespread
deployment of computer vision models on mobile devices,
such as the architectures of MobileNetV1 and MnasNet,
which can also achieve faster speed and accuracy in digital
signal detection and image processing. In the face of the
demand for signal readout methods for POCT micro-
ﬂuidics, computer vision techniques can detect signal
variations more sensitively, for example, by obtaining
accurate pixel-by-pixel color characteristics and distin-
guishing subtle changes in color brightness and hue
during a chromogenic reaction, thereby accurately quan-
tifying the concentration of the target analyte and
improving the accuracy of POCT85–88, as shown in Fig.
6b. Image processing algorithms can be integrated with
lightweight convolutional neural networks on a model
device to achieve fully automated real-time data readout,
analysis and upload, even in remote areas with poor
infrastructure89. On the other hand, the unique patterns
and features extracted from the data by computer vision
algorithms can reﬂect biomedical information that is
difﬁcult to obtain with traditional methods.
The built-in modules of smartphones enable them to
collect and convert signals, analyze data, and transmit and
store information. Image processing programs, software,
and lightweight image detection models based on con-
volutional neural networks can be rapidly deployed on
mobile devices, enabling automated image reconstruction
and enhancement90–92 and quantitative analysis82,93 to
carry out a wide range of cell analysis tasks, such as blood
cell morphology analysis94, cell counting95 and cell
tracking96, as shown in Fig. 6c. Image quality is limited by
the parameters of the mobile phone imaging sensor, such
as the ﬁeld of view, resolution and other model para-
meters, and the shooting environment, leading to difﬁ-
culties in capturing high-quality images in remote areas.
The
integration
of
noise
reduction
and
resolution
enhancement algorithms can help to improve image
quality and thus improve POCT sensitivity.
There is no doubt that microﬂuidic POCT technology
based on computer vision is a very promising area that
enables the integration of a microﬂuidic chip with mobile
devices for various cell detection needs. Traditional image
processing algorithms can eliminate irrelevant informa-
tion and restore useful information to enhance image
realism for fast, high sensitivity colorimetric analysis and
image preprocessing for object detection. Visual detection
models based on neural networks, supported by transfer
learning and cloud computing92, can signiﬁcantly reduce
the high memory requirements of POCT devices for the
deployment of complex models. It can address a wide
range of complex cellular analysis needs, greatly simpli-
fying health care and improving clinical outcomes, espe-
cially in resource-constrained areas.
Challenges and opportunities
The development of microﬂuidic technology in recent
years has made it possible to reach a higher standard in
cell imaging analysis. Computer vision, as an important
technical means, can intuitively interpret the phenotypic
characteristics and internal structure of each cell in a
noninvasive or low-damage way to isolate, identify and
analyze cells of interest in complex heterogeneous cell
populations.
Throughput vs. speed of imaging vs. image quality
Microﬂuidic systems have the potential to provide high-
throughput analysis, rapid image acquisition, and high
image quality, but achieving all three simultaneously can
be challenging due to various technical limitations. One
major limitation is the speed of imaging. High-speed
imaging is essential for tracking the dynamic behaviors of
cells in real time, such as cell migration, division, and
response to external stimuli. However, the faster the
imaging speed is, the lower the image quality, as the
exposure time for each frame is reduced, which can result
in motion blur, low contrast, and noise. Another limita-
tion is the throughput of the microﬂuidic system. High-
throughput analysis is essential for screening large cell
populations or for analyzing multiple samples simulta-
neously. However, increasing the throughput typically
requires sacriﬁcing imaging speed or image quality, as the
system needs to accommodate more cells or samples,
which can lead to reduced imaging resolution or longer
acquisition times. Finally, achieving high image quality
can also be challenging due to limitations in optical
resolution and sensitivity, as well as potential interference
from the microﬂuidic device itself. This can result in
lower image quality, particularly when imaging deep
within
a
microchannel
or
through
thick
biological
samples.
Thus, maintaining a balance among throughput, ima-
ging speed, and image quality is necessary to achieve
optimal performance in microﬂuidic cell analysis and to
ensure that the data obtained are reliable and accurate.
DeMello’s group presented a sheathless, microﬂuidic
imaging ﬂow cytometer incorporating stroboscopic illu-
mination for blur-free cellular analysis at throughputs
exceeding 50,000 cells/s19,20. Motion blur in images from
fast-moving objects can be eliminated by appropriate
stroboscopic light pulses. Stroboscopic illumination can
boost the ambient brightness level in short pulses, which
greatly reduces the exposure time of the camera. The
Zhou et al. Microsystems & Nanoengineering (2023) 9:116 
Page 11 of 15

===PAGE 12===
increased brightness allows the whole system to run fas-
ter, and the higher light output also allows for a reduced
aperture to provide a better depth of ﬁeld for imaging.
The single-cell ﬂow formed by inertial focusing avoids the
steps of object localization and segmentation in computer
visual detection and speeds up the system image proces-
sing. In addition, approaches using multiple channels in
parallel increase the detection throughput even further
based on achieving a balance between high throughput,
imaging speed and image quality. Holzner et al. presented
an optoﬂuidic ﬂow cytometer integrating a refractive,
microlens
array,
which
could
magnify
micron-sized
objects up to 4 times, not only providing optical perfor-
mance equivalent to that of a high magniﬁcation micro-
scope objective but also enhancing the throughput in wide
ﬁeld imaging and enumeration of cells97. Huang et al.
adopted an image enhancement approach by using a
generative adversarial network (GAN) model that enables
the images acquired at low magniﬁcation to reach the
resolution at high magniﬁcation, allowing the system to
acquire
high-quality
images
while
maintaining
high
throughput at low resolution. These results have paved
the way for the statistical analysis of cells with high-
dimensional spatial information98.
Microﬂuidic ﬂow cytometry achieves high cell detection
throughput while delivering large amounts of high-quality
cell image data. Relying solely on traditional image pro-
cessing can easily result in the loss of information about
heterogeneous cell populations; for instance, 1 mL of
whole blood may contain only 1–10 circulating tumor
cells. The development of deep learning algorithms has
completely revolutionized the approach to image pro-
cessing and the scale of image analysis99, transforming on-
chip imaging into an intelligent engine capable of fully
automated
quantitative
analysis
that
was
previously
unimaginable.
Development of deep learning
With the rapid advancement of computer vision and
microﬂuidic technology as well as improved hardware,
complex cell visual analysis is attracting more attention in
cell research. Artiﬁcial intelligence branches, supervised
learning, unsupervised learning, reinforcement learning
and transfer learning are being developed to signiﬁcantly
enhance computer vision neural networks in cell image
analysis. Here, unsupervised learning or weakly super-
vised learning can extract information on the internal
relationships of data without requiring domain experts to
annotate the data100. It can also ﬁnd hidden populations
of cells that are rare or only slightly different from other
cells that have not been observed; thus, it is useful for
discovering new cell types or phenotypes101–103. Reinfor-
cement learning is a process of interacting with the
environment, receiving rewards or punishments after each
action, learning through trial and error, and optimization
with the goal of maximizing cumulative rewards. It has
shown good results in omics analysis, biomedical image
analysis, drug screening and other ﬁelds104 and performed
satisfactorily in high-throughput microﬂuidics control,
which has paved the way for robust and repeatable long-
term microﬂuidics experiments105,106. On the other hand,
applications of transfer learning can greatly improve the
generalizability of neural networks, train the model faster,
and obtain higher prediction accuracy107.
A major challenge in applying deep learning in micro-
ﬂuidics is the acquisition of training data. However,
manually annotating datasets is time-consuming and
highly dependent on the prior knowledge of the experts.
Thus, there is uncertainty in the true value, that is, there
are errors in the annotations provided by the experts.
Active learning may be adopted to solve the problem of
limited data labels and a high cost of data annotation and
to avoid subjectivity and selection bias when experts
annotate data. It was seen to improve the model gen-
eralizability108. Active learning can proactively propose
some annotation requests, submit selected data to experts
for annotation, and then train the model with the anno-
tated data. The above process is repeated continuously
until the model achieves the ideal accuracy109. In addition,
the imbalance of data classes will affect the results of
neural network analysis. In this case, data resampling and
data enhancement are often used to balance the amount
of data in each category, or the loss function is modiﬁed to
add a larger penalty coefﬁcient to the class with fewer
samples so that the model training is more in favor of the
class with fewer samples110.
In the development of microﬂuidic chips, multimodal
data fusion is a future trend111. It integrates multiple
detection methods into a chip to measure multiple para-
meters of the target, such as simultaneously measuring
the size of a single cell, the polarizability under multiple
frequencies and the deformability of cells in the process of
cell tracking112 for more comprehensively characterized
cells. Convolutional networks have proven to be effective
in analyzing the impedance spectra generated by electrical
impedance detection113, and the synergistic detection and
cross-validation of optical imaging and electrical impe-
dance is very promising114.
The combination of organ-chip and computer vision
also has great potential to obtain microscopic cell defor-
mation and movement that cannot be observed by the
naked eye or through a microscope, such as cell migration
in blood vessels115 and brain tumor metastasis in the
blood‒brain barrier116,117. Chen et al. used an improved
CNN to recognize and focus tumor spheroids auto-
matically and to observe the structural changes and
dynamic growth of tumors. It was found that CNNs could
clearly extract cell features such as tumor spheroid
Zhou et al. Microsystems & Nanoengineering (2023) 9:116 
Page 12 of 15

===PAGE 13===
boundaries and tumor surface roughness, accurately
detect the degree of tumor spheroid invasion on 3D organ
chips, and automatically generate analysis reports118.
Computer vision techniques can also track the growth of
cells in organs or organoids in real time, providing a more
detailed, intuitive and comprehensive understanding of
cell growth and movement119. They will play an important
role in computer-assisted early cancer screening, tumor
drug development and personalized medicine.
In summary, the analysis of cell composition, structure
and morphology at the single-cell level is essential in
various ﬁelds, such as cell biology, medical research, and
drug discovery. In the past, manual observation of cell
images was the primary way to extract information about
cells. However, manual observation is time-consuming,
prone to human errors and biases and is not practical
when analyzing large datasets in the AI era. Therefore,
computer vision techniques have emerged as an alter-
native to manual observation.
Traditional computer vision methods rely on feature
extraction, which involves deﬁning a set of handcrafted
features based on the prior knowledge of researchers.
These methods can perform cell feature extraction and
some conversions regarding color and grayscale at a very
fast speed. Thus, they have been widely used in high-
throughput imaging cytometry. However, these methods
are not suitable for analyzing complex cell images with a
large number of features. When dealing with complex
cellular images with a large number of features, deep
learning
neural
networks
have
become
increasingly
popular.
As the examples in this review have indicated, deep
learning neural networks can learn complex features
directly from cell images without the need for feature
extraction. These networks can learn and recognize cell
structures and morphology and perform cell segmenta-
tion, cell recognition, and cell tracking tasks. In particular,
CNN models can analyze large volumes of cell images
with high accuracy and speed, which enables researchers
to explore cell heterogeneity, reveal interactions among
cells, and enhance the understanding of cellular processes.
Conclusions
The combination of microﬂuidics and computer vision
has led to signiﬁcant advancements in cell analysis. In this
review, microﬂuidic devices are shown to enable the
manipulation and analysis of cells at the microscale level,
providing high precision and throughput and generating
speciﬁc cell patterns. On the other hand, computer vision
algorithms can process large amounts of data, analyze the
resulting images, extract quantitative data, and identify
patterns that may not be visible to the human eye. The
integration of these two technologies has allowed for
more efﬁcient and accurate cell analysis. This enables
researchers to study cells in a highly controlled environ-
ment, generating high-quality data that can be used to
answer complex research questions.
As computer vision algorithms continue to improve, we
can expect to see even more advanced cell imaging ana-
lysis. For example, machine learning algorithms could be
trained to recognize speciﬁc cell types or identify subtle
changes in cell behavior. Additionally, the use of micro-
ﬂuidic devices combined with computer vision could
enable high-throughput screening of drug candidates,
allowing for faster and more efﬁcient drug development.
In summary, the combination of microﬂuidics and
computer vision has tremendous potential for advancing
our understanding of cell behavior and developing new
treatments for disease.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the Hainan Provincial Higher Education Scientiﬁc
Research Project Key Project (HNKY2021ZD-7), the Hainan Provincial Social
Science Research Project (HNSK(YB)-20–24) and Hainan Provincial Key Research
and Development Program (ZDYF2020026).
Conﬂict of interest
The authors declare no competing interests.
Received: 19 September 2022 Revised: 21 March 2023 Accepted: 10 April
2023
References
1.
Riordon, J. et al. Deep learning with microﬂuidics for biotechnology. Trends
Biotechnol. 37, 310–324 (2019).
2.
He, J. et al. Recent advances and perspectives in microﬂuidics-based single-
cell
biosensing
techniques.
Small
Methods
https://doi.org/10.1002/
smtd.201700192 (2017).
3.
Ksiazek, T. G. et al. ELISA for the detection of antibodies to Ebola viruses. J.
Infect. Dis. 179, S192–S198 (1999).
4.
Postollec, F. et al. Recent advances in quantitative PCR (qPCR) applications in
food microbiology. Food Microbiol. 28, 848–861 (2011).
5.
Vasina, M. et al. Advanced database mining of efﬁcient haloalkane dehalo-
genases by sequence and structure bioinformatics and microﬂuidics. Chem.
Catal. 2, 2704–2725 (2022).
6.
Haasen, D. et al. How phenotypic screening inﬂuenced drug discovery:
lessons from 5 years of practice. Assay. Drug Dev. Technol. 15, 239–246 (2017).
7.
von Erlach, T. C. et al. Cell-geometry-dependent changes in plasma mem-
brane order direct stem cell signalling and fate. Nat. Mater. 17, 237–242
(2018).
8.
Nketia, T. A. et al. Analysis of live cell images: methods, tools and opportu-
nities. Methods 115, 65–79 (2017).
9.
Swinney, D. C. & Lee, J. A. Recent advances in phenotypic drug discovery.
F1000Res 9, F1000 (2020).
10.
Carpenter, A. E. et al. CellProﬁler: image analysis software for identifying and
quantifying cell phenotypes. Genome Biol. 7, R100 (2006).
11.
Grys, B. T. et al. Machine learning and computer vision approaches for
phenotypic proﬁling. J. Cell Biol. 216, 65–71 (2017).
12.
Khan, A. U. M. et al. AutoCellSeg: robust automatic colony forming unit
(CFU)/cell analysis using adaptive image segmentation and easy-to-use post-
editing techniques. Sci. Rep. 8, 7302 (2018).
13.
Lecun, Y., Kavukcuoglu, K. & Farabet, C. Convolutional netwokrs and appli-
cations in vision. In Proceedings of 2010 IEEE International Symposium on
Circuits and Systems (IEEE, 2010).
14.
Fukushima, K. Artiﬁcial vision by multi-layered neural networks: neocognitron
and its advances. Neural Netw. 37, 103–119 (2013).
Zhou et al. Microsystems & Nanoengineering (2023) 9:116 
Page 13 of 15

===PAGE 14===
15.
Lee, K. C. M. et al. Toward deep biophysical cytometry: prospects and
challenges. Trends Biotechnol. 39, 1249–1262 (2021).
16.
Chen, H. et al. Microﬂuidic technologies for cell deformability cytometry.
Smart Med. 1, e20220001 (2022).
17.
Gilbert, C. W. A computer programme for the analysis of human chromo-
somes. Nature 212, 1437–1440 (1966).
18.
Otto, O. et al. Real-time deformability cytometry: on-the-ﬂy cell mechanical
phenotyping. Nat. Methods 12, 199–202 (2015).
19.
Rane, A. S. et al. High-throughput multiparametric imaging ﬂow cytometry.
Chem 3, 588–602 (2017).
20.
Holzner, G. et al. High-throughput multiparametric imaging ﬂow cytometry:
toward diffraction-limited subcellular detection and monitoring of sub-
cellular processes. Cell Rep. 34, 108824 (2021).
21.
Wang, M. et al. Developments of conventional and microﬂuidic ﬂow cyto-
metry enabling high-throughput characterization of single cells. Biosens.
(Basel) 12, 443 (2022).
22.
Stavrakis, S. et al. High-throughput microﬂuidic imaging ﬂow cytometry. Curr.
Opin. Biotechnol. 55, 36–43 (2019).
23.
Urbanska, M. et al. A comparison of microﬂuidic methods for high-
throughput cell deformability measurements. Nat. Methods 17, 587–593
(2020).
24.
Kubankova, M. et al. Physical phenotype of blood cells is altered in COVID-19.
Biophys. J. 120, 2838–2847 (2021).
25.
Piergiovanni, M. et al. Deformation of leukemia cell lines in hyperbolic
microchannels: investigating the role of shear and extensional components.
Lab Chip 20, 2539–2548 (2020).
26.
Toepfner, N. et al. Detection of human disease conditions by single-cell
morpho-rheological phenotyping of blood. Elife 7, e29213 (2018).
27.
Fregin, B., Biedenweg, D. & Otto, O. Interpretation of cell mechanical
experiments in microﬂuidic systems depend on the choice of cellular shape
descriptors. Biomicroﬂuidics 16, 024109 (2022).
28.
Fregin, B. et al. High-throughput single-cell rheology in complex samples by
dynamic real-time deformability cytometry. Nat. Commun. 10, 415 (2019).
29.
Doan, M. et al. Deepometry, a framework for applying supervised and weakly
supervised deep learning to imaging cytometry. Nat. Protoc. 16, 3572–3595
(2021).
30.
Herbig, M. et al. Real-time deformability cytometry: label-free functional
characterization of cells. Methods Mol. Biol. 1678, 347–369 (2018).
31.
Otesteanu, C. F. et al. A weakly supervised deep learning approach for label-
free imaging ﬂow-cytometry-based blood diagnostics. Cell Rep. Methods 1,
100094 (2021).
32.
Vembadi, A., Menachery, A. & Qasaimeh, M. A. Cell cytometry: review and
perspective on biotechnological advances. Front Bioeng. Biotechnol. 7, 147
(2019).
33.
Dima, A. A. et al. Comparison of segmentation algorithms for ﬂuorescence
microscopy images of cells. Cytom. A 79, 545–559 (2011).
34.
Shen, S. P. et al. Automatic Cell Segmentation by Adaptive Thresholding
(ACSAT)
for
large-scale
calcium
imaging
datasets.
eNeuro
5,
ENEURO.0056–18.2018 (2018).
35.
Logesh Kumar, S. et al. Identiﬁcation of lung cancer cell using watershed
segmentation on CT images, Indian. J. Sci. Technol. 9, 1–4 (2016).
36.
Koyuncu, C. F. et al. Iterative h-minima-based marker-controlled watershed
for cell nucleus segmentation. Cytom. A 89, 338–349 (2016).
37.
Mirsky, S. K. et al. Automated analysis of individual sperm cells using stain-free
interferometric phase microscopy and machine learning. Cytom. A 91,
893–900 (2017).
38.
Akram, S. U. et al. Cell tracking via proposal generation and selection. arXiv
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1705.03386 (2017).
39.
Meijering, E. Cell segmentation: 50 years down the road [Life Sciences]. IEEE
Signal Process. Mag. 29, 140–145 (2012).
40.
Pan, Y., Zhou, T. & Xia, Y. Bacterial foraging based edge detection for cell
image segmentation. Annu Int Conf. IEEE Eng. Med Biol. Soc. 2015, 3873–3876
(2015).
41.
Nitta, N. et al. Intelligent image-activated cell sorting. Cell 175, 266–276
(2018).
42.
Isozaki, A. et al. A practical guide to intelligent image-activated cell sorting.
Nat. Protoc. 14, 2370–2415 (2019).
43.
Isozaki, A. et al. Intelligent image-activated cell sorting 2.0. Lab Chip 20,
2263–2273 (2020).
44.
Chen, X. et al. Image-guided cell sorting using fast scanning lasers. APL
Photonics https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5144117 (2020).
45.
Godino, N. et al. Combining dielectrophoresis and computer vision for
precise and fully automated single-cell handling and analysis. Lab Chip 19,
4016–4020 (2019).
46.
Nawaz, A. A. et al. Intelligent image-based deformation-assisted cell sorting
with molecular speciﬁcity. Nat. Methods 17, 595–599 (2020).
47.
Girault, M. et al. An on-chip imaging droplet-sorting system: a real-time
shape recognition method to screen target cells in droplets with single cell
resolution. Sci. Rep. 7, 40072 (2017).
48.
Girault, M. et al. Algorithm for the precise detection of single and cluster cells
in microﬂuidic applications. Cytom. A 89, 731–741 (2016).
49.
Heo, Y. J. et al. Real-time image processing for microscopy-based label-free
imaging ﬂow cytometry in a microﬂuidic chip. Sci. Rep. 7, 11651 (2017).
50.
Lee, K. et al. User-friendly image-activated microﬂuidic cell sorting technique
using an optimized, fast deep learning algorithm. Lab Chip 21, 1798–1810
(2021).
51.
Redmon, J. & Farhadi, A. YOLOv3: An incremental improvement. arXiv https://
doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1804.02767 (2018).
52.
Redmon, J. et al. You Only Look Once: Uniﬁed, real-time object detection.
arXiv https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1506.02640 (2016).
53.
Bochkovskiy, A., Wang, C. Y. & Liao, H. YOLOv4: optimal speed and accuracy
of object detection. arXiv https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2004.10934 (2020).
54.
Gardner, K. et al. Deep learning detector for high precision monitoring of cell
encapsulation statistics in microﬂuidic droplets. Lab Chip 22, 4067–4080
(2022).
55.
Arjun, A., Ajith, R. R. & Kumar Ranjith, S. Mixing characterization of binary-
coalesced droplets in microchannels using deep neural network. Biomicro-
ﬂuidics 14, 034111 (2020).
56.
Li, S. et al. Label‐free classiﬁcation of dead and live colonic adenocarcinoma
cells based on 2D light scattering and deep learning analysis. Cytom. Part A
99, 1134–1142 (2021).
57.
Du, Z. et al. Label-free detection and enumeration of rare circulating tumor
cells by bright-ﬁeld image cytometry and multiframe image correlation
analysis. Lab Chip 22, 3390–3401 (2022).
58.
Mikami, H. et al. High-speed imaging meets single-cell analysis. Chem 4,
2278–2300 (2018).
59.
Girault, M. et al. Particle recognition in microﬂuidic applications using a
template matching algorithm. Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 55, 06GN05 (2016).
60.
Xiong, B. et al. Dual-modality imaging microﬂuidic cytometer for onsite
detection
of
phytoplankton.
Photonics
https://doi.org/10.3390/
photonics8100435 (2021).
61.
Huang, X. et al. Machine learning based single-frame super-resolution pro-
cessing for lensless blood cell counting. Sensors (Basel) 16, 1836 (2016).
62.
Grcs, Z. et al. A deep learning-enabled portable imaging ﬂow cytometer for
cost-effective, high-throughput, and label-free analysis of natural water
samples. Light Sci. Appl. 7, 66 (2018).
63.
Singh, D. K. et al. Label-free, high-throughput holographic screening and
enumeration of tumor cells in blood. Lab Chip 17, 2920–2932 (2017).
64.
Luo, Y. et al. Quantitative particle agglutination assay for point-of-care testing
using mobile holographic imaging and deep learning. Lab Chip 21,
3550–3558 (2021).
65.
Saad, M. G. et al. A droplet-based gradient microﬂuidic to monitor and
evaluate the growth of Chlorella vulgaris under different levels of nitrogen
and
temperatures.
Algal
Res.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.algal.2019.101657
(2019).
66.
Xu, M. et al. Morphological indicator for directed evolution of Euglena gracilis
with a high heavy metal removal efﬁciency. Environ. Sci. Technol. 55,
7880–7889 (2021).
67.
Jagannadh, V. K., Adhikari, J. V. & Gorthi, S. S. Automated cell viability
assessment using a microﬂuidics based portable imaging ﬂow analyzer.
Biomicroﬂuidics 9, 024123 (2015).
68.
Kim, K., Kim, S. & Jeon, J. S. Visual estimation of bacterial growth level in
microﬂuidic culture systems. Sens. (Basel) 18, 447 (2018).
69.
Chen, Y. C., Zhang, Z. & Yoon, E. Early prediction of single-cell derived sphere
formation rate using convolutional neural network image analysis. Anal.
Chem. 92, 7717–7724 (2020).
70.
Lojk, J. et al. Automatic Cell Counter for Cell Viability Estimation (IEEE, 2014).
71.
Zhang, J. et al. Label-free, high resolution, multi-modal light micro-
scopy for discrimination of live stem cell differentiation status. Sci. Rep.
8, 697 (2018).
72.
Ding, M. & Edwards, B. S. High-throughput ﬂow cytometry in drug discovery.
SLAS Discov. 23, 599–602 (2018).
Zhou et al. Microsystems & Nanoengineering (2023) 9:116 
Page 14 of 15

===PAGE 15===
73.
Swinney, D. C. & Anthony, J. How were new medicines discovered? Nat. Rev.
Drug Discov. 10, 507–519 (2011).
74.
Zhang, Z. et al. Label-free estimation of therapeutic efﬁcacy on 3D cancer
spheres using convolutional neural network image analysis. Anal. Chem. 91,
14093–14100 (2019).
75.
Su, Z. et al. A high-throughput system combining microﬂuidic hydrogel
droplets with deep learning for screening the antisolvent-crystallization
conditions of active pharmaceutical ingredients. Lab Chip 20, 1907–1916
(2020).
76.
Matsumoto, Y. et al. A microﬂuidic channel method for rapid drug-
susceptibility testing of pseudomonas aeruginosa. PLoS One 11, e0148797
(2016).
77.
Yu, H. et al. Phenotypic antimicrobial susceptibility testing with deep learning
video microscopy. Anal. Chem. 90, 6314–6322 (2018).
78.
Huang L. et al. High content drug screening of primary cardiomyocytes
based on microﬂuidics and real-time ultra-large-scale high-resolution ima-
ging. Lab Chip https://doi.org/10.1039/D1LC00740H (2021).
79.
Ghosh, S. et al. A new microchannel capillary ﬂow assay (MCFA) platform
with lyophilized chemiluminescence reagents for a smartphone-based POCT
detecting malaria. Microsyst. Nanoeng. 6, 5 (2020).
80.
Liu, D. et al. Integrated microﬂuidic devices for in vitro diagnostics at point of
care. Aggregate https://doi.org/10.1002/agt2.184 (2022).
81.
Wang, B. et al. Smartphone-based platforms implementing microﬂuidic
detection with image-based artiﬁcial intelligence. Nat. Commun. 14, 1341
(2023).
82.
Priye, A., Ball, C. S. & Meagher, R. J. Colorimetric-luminance readout for
quantitative analysis of ﬂuorescence signals with a smartphone CMOS sen-
sor. Anal. Chem. 90, 12385–12389 (2018).
83.
Wu, W. et al. Direct single-cell antimicrobial susceptibility testing of Escher-
ichia coli in urine using a ready-to-use 3D microwell array chip. Lab Chip 23,
2399–2410 (2023).
84.
Chen, H. et al. Aptamer-functionalized barcodes in herringbone
microﬂuidics for multiple detection of exosomes. Small Methods 6,
e2200236 (2022).
85.
Woolf, M. S. et al. Digital postprocessing and image segmentation for
objective analysis of colorimetric reactions. Nat. Protoc. 16, 218–238 (2021).
86.
Kim, S. C. et al. A smartphone-based optical platform for colorimetric analysis
of microﬂuidic device. Sens. Actuators B: Chem. 239, 52–59 (2017).
87.
Lopez-Ruiz, N. et al. Smartphone-based simultaneous pH and nitrite colori-
metric determination for paper microﬂuidic devices. Anal. Chem. 86,
9554–9562 (2014).
88.
Kim, H. et al. Fluorescent sensor array for high-precision pH classiﬁcation with
machine learning-supported mobile devices. Dyes and Pigm. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.dyepig.2021.109492 (2021).
89.
Turbe, V. et al. Deep learning of HIV ﬁeld-based rapid tests. Nat. Med. 27,
1165–1170 (2021).
90.
Tseng, D. et al. Lensfree microscopy on a cellphone. Lab Chip 10, 1787–1792
(2010).
91.
Lee, S. A. & Yang, C. A smartphone-based chip-scale microscope using
ambient illumination. Lab Chip 14, 3056–3063 (2014).
92.
Im, H. et al. Digital diffraction analysis enables low-cost molecular diagnostics
on a smartphone. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 112, 5613–5618 (2015).
93.
Gou, T. et al. Smartphone-based mobile digital PCR device for DNA quan-
titative analysis with high accuracy. Biosens. Bioelectron. 120, 144–152 (2018).
94.
Zhu, H. et al. Cost-effective and rapid blood analysis on a cell-phone. Lab
Chip 13, 1282–1288 (2013).
95.
Zeng, Y. et al. A low cost and portable smartphone microscopic device for
cell counting. Sens. Actuators A: Phys. 274, 57–63 (2018).
96.
Fudickar S. et al. Mask R-CNN based C. elegans detection with a DIY
microscope. Biosensors (Basel) 11, 257 (2021).
97.
Holzner, G. et al. An optoﬂuidic system with integrated microlens arrays for
parallel imaging ﬂow cytometry. Lab Chip 18, 3631–3637 (2018).
98.
Huang, K. et al. Deep imaging ﬂow cytometry. Lab Chip 22, 876–889 (2022).
99.
Siu, D. M. D. et al. Optoﬂuidic imaging meets deep learning: from merging to
emerging. Lab Chip 23, 1011–1033 (2023).
100.
Radford A., Metz L., Chintala S. Unsupervised representation learning with
deep convolutional generative adversarial networks. arXiv https://doi.org/
10.48550/arXiv.1511.06434 (2015).
101.
Pattanaik, P. A., Mittal, M. & Khan, M. Z. Unsupervised deep learning CAD
scheme for the detection of Malaria in blood smear microscopic images. IEEE
Access 8, 94936–94946 (2020).
102.
Godinez W. J., Hossain I. & Zhang X. Unsupervised phenotypic analysis of
cellular images with multiscale convolutional neural networks. bioRxiv https://
doi.org/10.1101/361410 (2018).
103.
Zamanighomi, M. et al. Unsupervised clustering and epigenetic classiﬁcation
of single cells. Nat. Commun. 9, 2410 (2018).
104.
Mahmud, M. et al. Applications of deep learning and reinforcement learning
to biological data. IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn Syst. 29, 2063–2079 (2018).
105.
Abe, T., Oh-Hara, S. & Ukita, Y. Adoption of reinforcement learning for the
intelligent control of a microﬂuidic peristaltic pump. Biomicroﬂuidics 15,
034101 (2021).
106.
Dressler, O. J. et al. Reinforcement learning for dynamic microﬂuidic control.
ACS Omega 3, 10084–10091 (2018).
107.
Liu, A. et al. Sparse coding induced transfer learning for HEp-2 cell classiﬁ-
cation. Biomed. Mater. Eng. 24, 237–243 (2014).
108.
Cohn, D., Atlas, L. & Ladner, R. Improving generalization with active learning.
Mach. Learn. 15, 201–221 (1994).
109.
Budd, S., Robinson, E. C. & Kainz, B. A survey on active learning and human-in-
the-loop deep learning for medical image analysis. Med Image Anal. 71,
102062 (2021).
110.
Haibo, H. & Garcia, E. A. Learning from Imbalanced Data. IEEE Trans. Knowl.
Data Eng. 21, 1263–1284 (2009).
111.
Haandbæk, N. et al. Characterization of single yeast cell phenotypes using
microﬂuidic impedance cytometry and optical imaging. ACS Sens. 1,
1020–1027 (2016).
112.
Apichitsopa, N., Jaffe, A. & Voldman, J. Multiparameter cell-tracking intrinsic
cytometry for single-cell characterization. Lab Chip 18, 1430–1439 (2018).
113.
Caselli, F. et al. Deciphering impedance cytometry signals with neural net-
works. Lab Chip 22, 1714–1722 (2022).
114.
Liang H. et al. Development of microﬂuidic ﬂow cytometry capable of
characterization of single-cell intrinsic structural and electrical parameters. J.
Micromech. Microeng. 32, 035007 (2022).
115.
Wang, M. et al. Multicell migration tracking within angiogenic networks by
deep learning-based segmentation and augmented Bayesian ﬁltering. J.
Med. Imaging (Bellingham) 5, 024005 (2018).
116.
Wei, W. et al. 3D in vitro blood-brain-barrier model for investigating barrier
Iinsults. Adv. Sci. (Weinh) 10, e2205752 (2023).
117.
Oliver, C. R. et al. A platform for artiﬁcial intelligence based identiﬁcation of
the extravasation potential of cancer cells into the brain metastatic niche. Lab
Chip 19, 1162–1173 (2019).
118.
Chen, Z. et al. Automated evaluation of tumor spheroid behavior in 3D
culture using deep learning-based recognition. Biomaterials 272, 120770
(2021).
119.
Bian, X. et al. A deep learning model for detection and tracking in high-
throughput images of organoid. Comput. Biol. Med. 134, 104490 (2021).
120.
Angermueller, C. et al. Deep learning for computational biology. Mol. Syst.
Biol. 12, 878 (2016).
121.
Parnamaa, T. & Parts, L. Accurate classiﬁcation of protein subcellular locali-
zation from high-throughput microscopy images using deep learning. G3
(Bethesda) 7, 1385–1392 (2017).
Zhou et al. Microsystems & Nanoengineering (2023) 9:116 
Page 15 of 15