===PAGE 1===
Citation: Tsai, H.-F.; Podder, S.;
Chen, P.-Y. Microsystem Advances
through Integration with Artiﬁcial
Intelligence. Micromachines 2023, 14,
826. https://doi.org/10.3390/
mi14040826
Academic Editors: Nam-Trung
Nguyen and Daniel Ahmed
Received: 9 March 2023
Revised: 4 April 2023
Accepted: 6 April 2023
Published: 8 April 2023
Copyright:
© 2023 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed
under
the
terms
and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
micromachines
Review
Microsystem Advances through Integration with
Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Hsieh-Fu Tsai 1,2,3,*
, Soumyajit Podder 1
and Pin-Yuan Chen 1,2,*
1
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan City 333, Taiwan;
d1131005@cgu.edu.tw
2
Department of Neurosurgery, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Keelung, Keelung City 204, Taiwan
3
Center for Biomedical Engineering, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan City 333, Taiwan
*
Correspondence: hftsai@cgu.edu.tw (H.-F.T.); pinyuanc@gmail.com (P.-Y.C.);
Tel.: +886-3-2118800 (ext. 3079) (H.-F.T.)
Abstract: Microﬂuidics is a rapidly growing discipline that involves studying and manipulating
ﬂuids at reduced length scale and volume, typically on the scale of micro- or nanoliters. Under the
reduced length scale and larger surface-to-volume ratio, advantages of low reagent consumption,
faster reaction kinetics, and more compact systems are evident in microﬂuidics. However, miniatur-
ization of microﬂuidic chips and systems introduces challenges of stricter tolerances in designing
and controlling them for interdisciplinary applications. Recent advances in artiﬁcial intelligence (AI)
have brought innovation to microﬂuidics from design, simulation, automation, and optimization
to bioanalysis and data analytics. In microﬂuidics, the Navier–Stokes equations, which are partial
differential equations describing viscous ﬂuid motion that in complete form are known to not have
a general analytical solution, can be simpliﬁed and have fair performance through numerical ap-
proximation due to low inertia and laminar ﬂow. Approximation using neural networks trained by
rules of physical knowledge introduces a new possibility to predict the physicochemical nature. The
combination of microﬂuidics and automation can produce large amounts of data, where features and
patterns that are difﬁcult to discern by a human can be extracted by machine learning. Therefore,
integration with AI introduces the potential to revolutionize the microﬂuidic workﬂow by enabling
the precision control and automation of data analysis. Deployment of smart microﬂuidics may be
tremendously beneﬁcial in various applications in the future, including high-throughput drug dis-
covery, rapid point-of-care-testing (POCT), and personalized medicine. In this review, we summarize
key microﬂuidic advances integrated with AI and discuss the outlook and possibilities of combining
AI and microﬂuidics.
Keywords: microﬂuidic device; lab-on-a-chip; micro total analysis system; artiﬁcial intelligence;
machine learning; personalized medicine
1. Introduction
The study and control of ﬂuids in channels and systems with perimeters generally
between a few micrometers to a few millimeters is known as microﬂuidics [1]. The microﬂu-
idic ﬂows are typically of low Reynolds number, i.e., viscous forces outweigh inertial forces,
and are thus laminar in nature [2]. The high surface-area-to-volume ratio in microﬂuidics
enables faster heat and mass transport, which enhances reaction control and speeds up
reaction time [3]. The microﬂuidics discipline entails the theoretical and technological
development of accurate manipulation of microscopic ﬂuid volume and examination of
phenomena occurring within it. Applications using microﬂuidic devices can be found in
broad domains across biomedicine, chemistry, and material science [4–6].
A branch of artiﬁcial intelligence called machine learning is concerned with creating
algorithms that can learn from data and establish the association between data and the
Micromachines 2023, 14, 826. https://doi.org/10.3390/mi14040826
https://www.mdpi.com/journal/micromachines

===PAGE 2===
Micromachines 2023, 14, 826
2 of 30
features of interest [7]. Moreover, the iterative update of parameters in machine learning
algorithms allows their accuracies to increase when the algorithms “learn” from additional
data. Furthermore, development of artiﬁcial neural networks (ANNs) has advanced
artiﬁcial intelligence in recent decades, particularly in image and language recognition [8,9].
In neural networks, inﬂuenced by applied mathematics, physics, and neuroscience, artiﬁcial
neurons are mathematically modeled and arranged in layers to process information similar
to how biological neurons would be. During training, the weight of each association
between neurons is updated by backward propagation to establish the association between
data and features [10]. In deep learning, as the neural network layers deepen and the
number of neurons increases, more data are required, but patterns in complex data can be
recognized [11]. As a result, the training of it becomes more computationally demanding,
but through the advances of parallel processing offered in the graphics processing unit
(GPU), the ﬁeld of deep learning continues to thrive and has seen innovation to various
applications such as self-driving car, security, drug development, and medical image
diagnosis [12–17].
Intelligent microﬂuidics, a ﬁeld enabled by the integrating the data processing capabil-
ity of machine learning and data science with the automation potential in microﬂuidics [18],
is particularly effective in advancing quantitative biology and rapid medical diagnos-
tics [19]. Next-generation biomimetic microﬂuidic systems such as organ-on-chips (OoCs)
have great potential to recapitulate and model human physiological as well as patho-
physiological processes in vitro. The complex and vast amounts of high-throughput data
generated on these platforms are also great opportunities for AI.
In this review, we discuss the development, applications, and outlook of intelligent
microﬂuidics, where advancements are made through integration between microﬂuidics
and artiﬁcial intelligence (Figure 1).
Figure 1. Diagram of microﬂuidic applications integrated with artiﬁcial intelligence (AI). µTAS stands
for micro-total analysis systems.
2. AI-Enhanced Smart Platform and Automation
2.1. Computer-Aided Microsystem Design and Optimization
Microﬂuidic chips take advantage of physical phenomena at smaller length scales;
therefore, miniaturization of these devices often requires customized design. Recent ad-
vances in machine learning have been applied to the design and optimization of microﬂuidic
systems [20].
The entire hydraulic circuit and components within it can be analyzed and opti-
mized using circuit modeling [21–25]. Several machine learning and numerical simu-
lation methods have been applied to microdevice design for ﬂow sculpturing [26–28],
micromixing [29–32], microjetting [33], droplet microﬂuidics [34,35], and extensional rheom-
etry [36]. For example, a convolutional neural network (CNN) is trained to learn the

===PAGE 3===
Micromachines 2023, 14, 826
3 of 30
sculpturing outcome of ﬂow due to micropost locations in the microﬂuidic channel; the sys-
tem has improved performance over conventional computational ﬂuid dynamics (CFD)-
based forward models and can potentially predict results when the condition is outside the
scope of what was used in the training (Figure 2a) [27]. By taking the AI approach, design
iteration of microﬂuidic chip can be rapidly accelerated.
Moreover, machine learning techniques can also be applied to the fabrication of
microsystems. For example, Wang et al. adapted a fully automated CNN computer vi-
sion system to aid in calibration during 3D printing of microstructure dimensions [37].
Shchanikov et al. used an ANN to design a bidirectional biointerface with nanoelectronics
and microﬂuidics [38]. Contemporary numerical simulation software can readily integrate
with machine learning techniques to iterate microdevice designs, accelerating device devel-
opment and validation, e.g., the ones used for particle trajectory prediction can be adapted
for predicting red blood cell (RBC) movements in microchannels [39–41].
Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) Modeling
In recent years, advances in GPUs have made the training of deep ANNs possible.
The features in structured data sequences, images, and videos can be quickly learned and
inferred in modeling ﬂuid dynamics [42–44].
In continuous-ﬂow microﬂuidics, Cai et al. introduced artiﬁcial intelligence velocime-
try (AIV), which integrated imaging data with physics-informed neural networks, to mea-
sure the velocity and stress ﬁelds of blood ﬂow [45]. By utilizing neural networks to
automatically evaluate experimental data and infer important hemodynamic markers that
quantify vascular damage, AIV offered a novel paradigm that seamlessly blended pictures,
experimental data, and underlying physics. Similarly, the ﬂow velocity proﬁle in a shallow
microﬂuidic channel could also be extracted from the scalar signal transport through a
deep neural network [46]. In microﬂuidic systems, often a system is in the laminar regime
with low Reynolds number and high Péclet number, which means that viscous force and
advection are more dominant than effects from inertia and diffusion. In certain applications,
such as concentration gradient generation and chemical synthesis, mixing efﬁciency in
microchannels becomes important. The ﬂuid behavior in microstructure-based passive
microﬂuidic mixers can be predicted using AI, and designs can be rapidly iterated in
comparison to conventional physics-coupled numerical simulations where ﬂow ﬁeld and
chemical transport has to be sequentially solved [29–32,47].
Multiphase ﬂow is also a discipline that has many applications, such as two-phase
emulsion, protein extraction in biotechnology, and injection molding in manufacturing.
The ﬂow pattern in two-phase ﬂuid mixing can be rapidly modeled using neural networks
trained with physical knowledge and comparable to that by classical CFD solutions, where
approximation to Navier–Stokes equations requires large amount of computational re-
sources [48–51]. Moreover, combinatorial multiphase ﬂow can be utilized to assemble
colloidal materials in microﬂuidics, and machine learning can accelerate the predictability
of material characteristics for designing such materials [52]. An AI algorithm to predict
multiphase ﬂuid dynamics can accelerate and aid in the design of microﬂuidic chips for
these applications.
2.2. Automation Control in Microsystems
2.2.1. Flow Control
The ﬂow in microﬂuidics can be actuated by pumps of different mechanisms, such as
syringe-driven, peristaltic, pressure-driven, piezoelectric, electro-osmotic, or microvalve-
based peristaltic micropumps [53]. Dynamic laminar ﬂow control by pistons or syringe
pumps is required in applications where joining ﬂow boundary location requires precise
control and syncing. Dressler et al. developed a reinforcement learning-based deep Q
network that utilized image feedback for rapid and high accuracy ﬂow control and droplet
size control [54].

===PAGE 4===
Micromachines 2023, 14, 826
4 of 30
Micropumps composed of microvalves or piezoelectric valves often become important
components due to their ability to integrate into the microdevice and to realize the develop-
ment of the micro-total analysis system (µTAS) [55]. Abe et al. used reinforcement learning
for timing control of valve operation in peristaltic micropumps to increase the maximum
ﬂow rate [56,57]. Integration of multiple microvalves into a fully programmable biochip
was designed by Shayan et al. [58]. Integration of machine learning techniques with the
fully programmable platform enables real-time detection of biochip status and detection of
potential attacks against a real-world bioassay.
2.2.2. Thermal Control
The advances in microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) continue to decrease the size
and increase the power, therefore thermal management on MEMS devices becomes a vital
component to the system. Due to the small length scale and small thermal resistances in
microﬂuidics, a microﬂuidic heat sink was applied for cooling MEMS chips [59]. Moreover,
precise heating or cooling of microﬂuidics is also important for applications in µTAS [60].
High speed and accurate thermal control of a microﬂuidic platform is made possible by
the use of an ANN trained on infrared (IR) thermography [61]. Quinn et al. also reported an
optically controlled thermoﬂuidics platform with machine learning feedback control [62].
As an alternative to passive thermal measurement using IR thermography, temperature-
sensitive species can be introduced to the system and report local temperatures in the
microenvironment, such as nanocrystals or quantum dots. However, the temperature often
needs to be inferred from photoluminescence data and the accuracy is poor. By applying a
fully-connected ANN, Lewis et al. demonstrated that improved accuracy and temporal
resolution of temperature in the local microenvironment were obtained using cadmium
telluride (CdTe) quantum dots [63].
Figure 2. Selected examples of AI-enhanced smart platforms and automation. (a) A CNN framework
to predict the outcome of ﬂow sculpturing by micropillar microstructures [27]. Reproduced under
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International license (CC–BY). (b) A DNN to predict particle
patterning by surface acoustic waves in a shape library was proposed by Raymond et al. [64]. Re-
produced under CC–BY license. (c) Machine-learning-empowered design automation of droplet
microﬂuidics channel [34]. Reproduced under CC–BY license. (d) Machine-learning-assisted classiﬁ-
cation for droplet manipulation in a magnetic digital microﬂuidic platform [65]. Reproduced under
CC–BY license.

===PAGE 5===
Micromachines 2023, 14, 826
5 of 30
2.2.3. Particle Manipulation
In many applications, such as separation, diagnostics, and patterning, particle ma-
nipulation is often a required process. The low reagent requirements and smaller length
scale make microﬂuidics a good candidate platform for such applications [66]. The particle
manipulation can be exerted through electromagnetic, optical, hydrodynamic, or acoustoﬂu-
idic techniques, while machine learning methods can be further adapted for precise and
rapid control.
The particles in the ﬂuid system can be manipulated through ﬂow dynamics. Fang et al.
used an ANN-based feedback pump control to create a hydrodynamic Stokes trap for
particle manipulation [67]. Through reinforcement Q-learning, Abe et al. also demonstrated
that a micropump-based system can learn to control and manipulate a microparticle to
reside in a predeﬁned target area [57]. Particles in a curved channel or in a straight channel
ﬁlled with viscoelastic ﬂuids also experienced inertial motion and were manipulated [68,69].
Recently, Su et al. and Hamdi et al. separately reported AI-accelerated approaches to
calculate lift coefﬁcient in microﬂuidic channels for inertial focusing based on knowledge
from the computationally-expensive direct numerical simulation method [70,71].
Magnetic particles can also be conjugated to a desired biorecognition element, and
an external magnetic ﬁeld can be applied for magnetophoretic isolation [72]. Koh et al.
combined magnetophoresis with supervised learning for sorting and puriﬁcation of normal
sperm based on the slender body theory [73]. Optical power of light can also exert forces on
microscopic particles in the optical tweezers technique. While conventional control theory
such as the proportional–integral–derivative controller is commonly adapted, machine
learning techniques can also be used to increase speed and accuracy when calculating the
optical force and manipulation [74,75].
In the ﬁeld of acoustoﬂuidics, where a piezoelectric actuator or platform is used,
the particles can be spatially manipulated based on their acoustophysical properties, typ-
ically though a feedback control [76]. Raymond et al. trained a DNN on pictures of
presolved acoustic ﬁelds to allow rapidly tailored acoustic ﬁelds for patterning microparti-
cles in microchannel components (Figure 2b) [64]. By using AI to predict the acoustic ﬁeld,
the design of an acoustoﬂuidics chip can be optimized and automated for tailoring speciﬁc
applications. While conventional numerical and analytical solutions are used to resolve
acoustic pressure ﬁelds in designed geometry, the inverse problem can be resolved more
efﬁciently by taking the DNN approach. Similarly, Yiannacou et al. demonstrated that
control of a single ultrasound transducer frequency through an epsilon-greedy algorithm
can be used to control and manipulate the particles [77,78].
2.2.4. Droplet Control, Detection, and Tracking
Droplet microﬂuidics is a particular case of multiphase microﬂow, where two or more
immiscible ﬂuids are split into single or multiple emulsions as tiny liquid reactors for
bioanalysis, chemical synthesis, cell culture, and more [79,80].
To produce droplets of desired size, precise control and minimization of variation of
ﬂow rates are essential [54]. Mahdi and Daoud demonstrated that an ANN can be used to
predict the size of microdroplets [81]. Lashkaripour et al. proposed a web-based software
tool, DAFD, with machine learning algorithms to predict droplet formation performance
with a high level of accuracy in a ﬂow-focusing microﬂuidic chip (Figure 2c) [34]. The ma-
chine learning algorithm can also automate the microﬂuidic chip design for a speciﬁc
droplet size desired by the user. In particular, the DAFD software was designed for scien-
tiﬁc community collaboration, where the machine learning algorithms can learn both from
the data in the developer’s laboratory and from volunteered data from the community.
The federated learning approach can aid in creating a universal neural network for data
collected in different settings [82]. Similarly, Siemenn et al. adapted a Bayesian inference
with droplet size measurement feedback from images to optimize droplet generation [83].
The stability of microdroplets can be signiﬁcantly affected by the type of surfactant and
its concentration. Khor et al. established a convolutional autoencoder model to anticipate

===PAGE 6===
Micromachines 2023, 14, 826
6 of 30
if a droplet would become unstable and break up [84]. Chagot et al. utilized a Bayesian
regularized ANN and XGBoost algorithms to predict droplet size given ﬂow rate and sur-
factant concentrations with mean absolute percentage error as low as 3.9%, in comparison
to other state-of-the-art models [85].
Droplet segmentation and classiﬁcation in images can be achieved using machine
learning techniques as well. Various versions of CNN-based You Only Look Once (YOLO)
object detectors have been used for automated detection of droplets and content within
them at frame rates of up to 100 frames per second (FPS) [86,87]. Subsequent tracking of
droplets to extract droplet dynamics is also practiced using deep learning techniques under
brightﬁeld and ﬂuorescence microscopy [88,89].
In machine learning, the algorithm learns to establish the association between features
and data. Therefore, a trained neural network can also predict the experimental conditional
from image results [90]. For example, the microdroplet images can be predicted by a trained
deep neural network for the ﬂow rate or concentration used based on the droplet’s size and
optical property, reaching accuracy within 0.5% [91]. Arjun et al. also reported that droplets
with various chemical mixing efﬁciencies can be classiﬁed by a trained CNN [92]. Droplet
freezing and extrapolation of exact temperature for ice nucleation on a microﬂuidic freezer
platform was made possible using a DNN model with a polarized light detection [93].
Tang et al. reported an ANN to classify microdroplets containing magnetic particles and
showed its manipulation with failure-correction capability, demonstrating the superiority
of ANN compared to conventional magnetic digital microﬂuidic platform [65] (Figure 2d).
The integration of AI-based image analysis in the automation and control process of the
digital microﬂuidic platform provides additional advantages of quality assurance and
online decision making.
After detection and classiﬁcation of desired droplets, ﬂuid routing or sorting can
be integrated in the downstream microﬂuidic component to isolate them. Automated
routing of droplets has been demonstrated using deep reinforcement learning [94] and
evolutionary algorithms [95]. Alternatively, droplets containing desired products such as
cells or particles can be sorted as well when the AI for the detection is combined with an
active component for target puriﬁcation [96–98].
3. Process Optimization and Discovery
3.1. Synthetic Reaction Optimization
One advantage of AI is its ability to sequentially generate a large amount of experimen-
tal parameters for automated iteration, and it also discerns patterns in the result. Therefore,
many applications exist that automate microﬂuidics with AI for large-scale experimental
iteration in medicine, material science, and energy development [18,99].
For chemical synthesis, machine learning algorithms can be used to automate the
experiments and optimize based on feedback when combined with robotics [100–102].
McMullen and Jensen demonstrated an automated microreaction system incorporated
with silicon-based microﬂuidic devices and machine learning for optimization of synthesis
without the need for priori information, i.e., a “black-box” optimization, to the reaction
parameters [103,104] (Figure 3a), which means the microreaction system can be placed in
continuously self-optimization to ﬁnd the reaction parameters for best product properties
set by the designer. Rizkin et al. used a machine learning algorithm with IR monitoring to
automate microchemical reactors in the polymerization of zirconocene [105]. The param-
eters of the chemical kinetics of a complex reaction can also be modeled with the aid of
machine learning, leading to a broad technoeconomic outcome.
3.2. Nanoparticle Synthesis
Control of ﬂow rate, concentration, and mixing are vital variables for nucleation and
synthesis of nanoparticles on the microﬂuidic platform and one of the applications adapting
AI [106]. Krishnadasan et al. adapted a noise-tolerant global search algorithm for a black-
box optimization of injection rate and temperature for synthesizing CdSe nanoparticles on

===PAGE 7===
Micromachines 2023, 14, 826
7 of 30
a Y-shaped microﬂuidic reactor from CdO and Se precursor solutions [107]. Similarly, ANN
can be used to extract the condition–property relationship from the combinatorial synthesis
data and provide conditions to synthesize nanoparticles [108–113], nanotubes [114], nano-
formulation of pharmaceuticals [115], quantum dots [116,117], liposomes [118], or poly-
meric microparticles [119,120] (Figure 3b). Diamiati et al. trained an ANN to predict
particle size of poly(Lactide-co-glycolide) (PLGA) microparticles, a biocompatible drug
delivery polymer, based on the conditions of the ﬂow focusing synthesis experiments on
multiple different synthesis platforms. The learnability or the trainability of the AI enables
the in silico size-dependent design of microparticle synthesis for tailored applications.
Notably, the trainability of neural networks not only provides an optimization method
for synthesis in that early stage when the data size is small but can also continue to reﬁne
through learning the new data and further feedback the optimization [110] (Figure 3c). It
is expected that more machine learning, in particular generative neural networks, will be
adapted in nanoparticle synthesis workﬂow in future for designing application-tailored
nanoparticles in a variety of disciplines, such as medicine, energy, and more.
Figure 3. Microﬂuidics integrated with machine learning for process optimization and drug discovery.
(a) An automated microﬂuidic system for automated optimization of chemical synthesis. Reprinted
with permission from [103]. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. The font size have been
adjusted for sake of clarity. (b) A droplet microﬂuidic platform combined with AI for synthesizing
poly(Lactide-co-glycolide) microparticles from precipitating out of dichloromethane (DCM) [119].
Reproduced under CC–BY license. The ﬁgure has been reproduced for sake of clarity. (c) Two-step
drug synthesis microﬂuidic platform with machine learning optimization [110]. Reproduced under
CC–BY license. (d) A micromixer microﬂuidic platform combined with generative AI for de novo
drug design and synthesis [121]. Reproduced under CC BY–NC (noncommercial) license.

===PAGE 8===
Micromachines 2023, 14, 826
8 of 30
3.3. Drug Development
The automation and miniaturization capabilities of microﬂuidics make it a good can-
didate for drug synthesis, drug delivery, formulation, and susceptibility testing [122,123].
Here, we discuss the integration of AI with microﬂuidics for drug design, synthesis, and for-
mulation. The susceptibility testing application is discussed later in the following section.
Reinforcement learning provides an in silico means to generatively iterate drug design
based on input physicochemical properties. Popova et al. utilized such an approach to
create novel chemical libraries where the neural network can design chemicals by varying
physical properties [124]. Recently, Grisoni et al. took a similar approach to generatively
design drugs and further integrate with a microﬂuidic platform to synthesize the agonists
against the liver X receptor [121] (Figure 3d). Such an automated platform combining AI and
microﬂuidics introduces a closed-loop iterative optimization of drug design and synthesis
that reduces human intervention. In the future, the improvement of algorithms with active
learning could reﬁne and optimize the design and synthesis process continuously. Similarly,
machine learning used for iterating polymer synthesis and data-driven evaluation can
accelerate drug formulation development [125].
4. Micro-Total Analysis System (µTAS) and Clinical Diagnostics
One major application of microﬂuidics is the automation of chemical analysis and
clinical diagnostics, especially for point-of-care testing (POCT) [126,127]. In lab-on-chip
technologies, various experimental processes are integrated and miniaturized onto a single
microﬂuidic chip [128]. Further enhancement of data analysis and exclusion of potential
human prejudice by integrating AI sets a feasible path toward realization of a µTAS [129].
4.1. Disease Diagnosis and Prognosis
To monitor human physiological status, detection and quantiﬁcation of biomarkers
using calibrated biosensors are required. Although conventional quantiﬁcation by interpo-
lation with a reference is standardized, utilization of AI to quantify and detect anomalies
from pattern recognition in long-term clinical data presents unique opportunities. Combin-
ing paper microﬂuidics and ANN, the glucose concentration presented by the colorimetric
method can be quantiﬁed and calibrated with high accuracy, as demonstrated in artiﬁcial
urine and saliva [130,131].
Moreover, sensing applications based on image classiﬁcation and recognition are
particularly suitable for machine learning methods. Munoz et al. reported a machine
learning method to detect label-free DNA based on fractal structures in subnanoliter
droplets after loop-mediated isothermal ampliﬁcation (LAMP) [132]. Similarly, optical
detection of debris containing ambient RNA in droplets and excluded in data preprocessing
can improve the data quality for single-nucleus RNA sequencing by using a semisupervised
machine learning technique [133]. Alternatively, machine learning algorithms can also be
applied to electrical inference of size and detection of ultraﬁne particles with low mean
error [134].
Machine learning algorithms are sensitive to changes in cellular optical features due
to biophysical properties or protein deformation. AI-enhanced microscopic image analysis
of cells and tissues, therefore, is used for disease diagnosis in clinical settings. Deep-
learning-assisted classiﬁcation of the adhesion and deformation of RBCs in microchannels
can be used to diagnose and monitor sickle cell anemia [135–137]. Rizzuto et al. combined
microﬂuidics and AI-based video analysis to classify RBCs after passing microﬂuidic
constrictions for diagnosis of hereditary hemolytic anemia [138]. The neural network can
also predict the rigidity of RBCs directly from brightﬁeld microscopy images. Ellett et al.
used a microﬂuidic device to quantify the mobility of neutrophils in whole blood in
combination with machine-learning-based scoring for diagnosis of sepsis with 97% and
98% sensitivity and speciﬁcity [139].

===PAGE 9===
Micromachines 2023, 14, 826
9 of 30
Similarly, rapid classiﬁcation and quantiﬁcation of cancer cells in various tissues and
bodily ﬂuids can be accelerated by AI in the ﬁelds of liquid biopsy or digital pathology,
aiding clinicians and clinical laboratory scientists in disease diagnosis and prognosis, such
as in leukemia, prostate, breast, brain, and lung cancers [140–145]. Many cells shed from
primary tumors into patients’ circulatory systems in the form of circulating tumor cells
(CTCs). The amount of CTCs in patients’ blood, even after treatments, correlates with the
prognosis, also known as minimum residual disease (MRD). Therefore, concentration of
CTCs is a novel biomarker for cancer management. The presence of CTCs can be analyzed
and can predict prognosis with the aid of AI [146,147].
Mainstream immunochemical biosensors utilize the recognition ability of antibodies
to detect and quantify biomarkers in various bodily ﬂuids. Integrated with microﬂu-
idics, McRae et al. developed a compact programmable bionanochip platform (pBNC)
on which multiplex immunoassays against prostate cancer, ovarian cancer, acute myocar-
dial infarction, and drugs of abuse were performed on disposable cartridges for POCT
applications. Afterward, the data were relayed to machine learning algorithms for further
diagnosis based on previously trained data (Figure 4a) [148–150]. Furthermore, optical-
based immunoassay readout can be resolved with the aid of machine learning. Song et al.
reported a digital-enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) microarray for multiplex
quantiﬁcation of cytokines in patients who underwent cancer therapy [151] (Figure 4b).
The turnaround time of the 12-plex assay was within 40 min by taking advantage of the
microwell-based microarray and automated AI image analysis for biomarker quantiﬁcation.
Immunochemical methods, however, suffer limitations such as interference to ligand–
antibody interaction and the concentration-dependent hook effect, limiting the sensitivity,
speciﬁcity, and linear range of detection [152]. Utilizing machine learning algorithms has
also been shown to drastically improve the assay speciﬁcity and quantiﬁcation of very high
target concentration in surface-enhanced Raman spectrometric immunoassay and particle
agglutination immunoassay [153–155].
In recent decades, the use of microﬂuidics for clinical testing has seen much growth
due to increased adaption of POCT. At the same time, deep learning methods spur rapid
development of AI across broad disciplines and applications. Humankind then met the
challenge of a global pandemic at a scale not seen since the 1918 Spanish ﬂu, the coron-
avirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus
2 (SARS-CoV-2) [156,157]. The rapid spread of the disease came with devastating conse-
quences where healthcare systems were stretched to limits, state economies were stalled,
and social norms were disrupted. Microﬂuidics was quickly adapted to develop quick
turnaround of immunological as well as molecular antigen tests for rapid identiﬁcation and
diagnosis of exposed citizens and patients [158–160] for subsequent quarantine to curb the
spread of the infectious disease. For example, Bhuiyan et al. developed an AI-controlled
programmable microﬂuidic platform to perform ELISA immunoassays for cardiovascular
disease diagnosis and SARS-CoV-2 diagnosis [161,162]. Many microﬂuidic POCT sensing
platforms are also integrated with AI for analysis. Combining information and communica-
tion technologies (ICTs) with microﬂuidics, such as interfacing a smartphone with POCT
devices, provide a solution for rapid testing in low-resource settings where gold-standard
molecular diagnostics may not be easily available [163–166].
The combination of rapid testing offered by microﬂuidics and automated data analysis
by AI has immense potential for proactive management of emerging infectious diseases.
Not only can new diagnostics tests be rapidly developed after identiﬁcation of antigen
for future emerging infectious disease, but development of vaccines and drugs could be
accelerated as well, through automation by microﬂuidics and AI [167–170].

===PAGE 10===
Micromachines 2023, 14, 826
10 of 30
Figure 4. Micro- total analysis systems integrated with machine learning for clinical diagnostics.
(a) A compact programmable microﬂuidic platform capable of performing multiplex immunoassay
for POCT applications. Reprinted with permission from [150]. Copyright 2016 American Chemical
Society. (b) A digital ELISA microarray for cytokine quantiﬁcation with CNN-guided image process-
ing. Reprinted with permission from [151] with permission from Elsevier. (c) A microﬂuidic platform
with a convolutional neural network to predict drug efﬁcacy based on the viability of cultured cancer
spheres. Reprinted with permission from [171]. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (d) A
wearable sensor platform with AI data analysis for motion classiﬁcation [172]. Reproduced under
CC–BY license.
4.2. Drug Susceptibility Testing
Integrated microsystems can not only isolate target cells for analysis, but they also
integrate with mixing functions to investigate the susceptibility of target cells to pharma-
ceutical agents, an important parameter for clinical decisions. One common application is
the liquid biopsy. Kobayashi et al. showed that by combining microﬂuidic ﬂow cytometry,
time-stretch microscopy, and machine learning enables high-throughput, label-free analysis
drug susceptibility of breast cancer, leukemia cells, and platelets in as little as a 500 µL
sample [173–175].
Other major applications for drug susceptibility testing in clinical settings are thera-
peutic drug monitoring (TDM) and antimicrobial susceptibility testing (AST), where AI
algorithms have begun to be adapted for monitoring and prediction [176,177]. Particu-
larly for conventional AST, the time-to-result is of the essence for patient care. Therefore,
automated microﬂuidic platforms in conjugation with optical detection and deep learning-
powered analysis to rapidly detect bacteria, as well as screening and identifying appropriate
antibiotics choices and therapeutic ranges, are driven by clinical needs [178–181].
Three-dimensional tissue models such as spheroids have the potential of mimicking
tissue heterogeneity and drug transport in the microenvironment of an organism. However,
3D tissues have poor optical transmission in the visible light regions, making optical

===PAGE 11===
Micromachines 2023, 14, 826
11 of 30
characterization and evaluation difﬁcult, especially for conventional computer vision
algorithms. Deep learning models learn the features of target structures through pattern
recognition in images; therefore, they have great potential in image analysis for 3D tissue
images. Zhang et al. developed an automatic microﬂuidic chip in combination with CNN-
based image screening for evaluating drug susceptibility through viability prediction of
tumor spheres (Figure 4c) [171]. The effective drug changes the morphology and optical
quality of the spheroids, and AI models learn to associate the image with phenotypic results.
Therefore, the AI models are capable of predicting phenotype based on label-free images.
The trainability and predictive potential of deep learning in combination with microﬂuidic
drug testing platform could be a promising alternative to animal testing [182].
4.3. Smart Wearables
Microsystems engineered through semiconductor processes are often rigid; therefore,
they are limited from conformal sampling on organisms despite portability. When lab-on-
chip systems are engineered on ﬂexible substrates such as silicone or polyimides, such
wearable microsystems enable long-term seamless biosampling and measurements [126]
where conventional medical devices are often limited. Zhang and Tao showed that soft
electrical sensors adhered on skin in combination with machine learning enabled long-term
electrophysiological measurements [183]. In the management of cardiovascular diseases,
early detection of abnormal electrical signals empowered by AI also has tremendous
interests [184]. Similar needs in long-term monitoring of glucose in diabetes mellitus (DM)
patients could also beneﬁt from the combination of wearable devices and machine learning
to predict the onset of hyperglycemia on the ﬂy [185,186].
Soft sensors attached to the human body permit the measurement of pressure, force,
and strain to infer biomechanics. Machine learning algorithms can be used to calibrate sen-
sors [187,188] as well as tracking and predicting human gaits and motions (Figure 4d) [172,189].
Joining a multitude of sensors with Internet connectivity with AI at the core of data analysis
offers a promising future in personalized healthcare [190].
5. AI Approach for Quantitative Biology
Machine learning algorithms can discern patterns in complex and noisy biological data;
therefore, advances have been made recently in the ﬁeld of cell analysis and personalized
medicine by adopting AI for quantitative biology [191].
5.1. Cell Analysis
Counting, classifying, and sorting of cells are essential processes that have been long
adopted in microﬂuidics and not only used in clinical diagnostics but also in basic research.
Integration with AI further extends the data processing ability, such as prediction and
pattern recognition for phenotype identiﬁcation in cell data, which initiated a new era of
intelligent microﬂuidics [192].
5.1.1. Cell Counting and Classiﬁcation
The number of suspended cells in a solution can be counted conventionally through
optical detection, electrical resistance (Coulter method), or impedance [193]. Machine
learning algorithms such as support vector machine (SVM), logistic regression, or ANN can
extract cell features in optical images [194], lens-free holographic images [195], electrical
data [196], or a combination of two [197] for counting and classiﬁcation.
In combination with a brightﬁeld or ﬂuorescence microﬂuidic ﬂow cytometer, cells can
be counted, classiﬁed, and tracked at high speed using supervised learning as well as unsu-
pervised learning models [198–202]. Heo et al. showed that a supervised learning pipeline
combining a fully-connected regression network and CNN distinguished K562 leukemia
cells and RBCs with mean average precision (mAP) as high as 93.3% at 500 FPS [198]. Deep
learning models trained for virtually enhancing resolution can also be combined with

===PAGE 12===
Micromachines 2023, 14, 826
12 of 30
low-resolution, high-speed microﬂuidic ﬂow cytometry for counting and classifying algae,
mammalian cells, and yeasts [201].
Minute optical property differences in cells which are difﬁcult to discern by the naked
eye can be classiﬁed by machine learning algorithms after proper training. Rossi et al.
showed that CD4 and CD8 T lymphocytes can be differentiated by their scattered light due
to biophysical property differences [203]. Polarization microscopy can also be conjugated
with machine learning for the detection and classiﬁcation of non-small-cell lung cancer
cells without any staining [204].
In quantitative phase imaging (QPI) techniques, phase differences contributed by
differences in refractive index of various cellular components can be quantiﬁed using
digital holographic microscopy [205], lens-free holographic microscopy [206], interferome-
try [207,208], or time-stretched microscopy [209], both in 2D and 3D [210]. Conventional
algorithms for phase retrieval are often time-consuming because image data can be noisy.
Using machine learning, optical properties such as absorption, scattering, and refractive in-
dexes can be used to extract biophysical information of cells such as dry mass. Without any
labeling, only minute differences exist between nucleated white blood cells (WBCs) and can-
cer cells. Hirotsu et al. demonstrated that deep learning can assist label-free identiﬁcation of
cancer cells from WBCs, with the area under the curve of receiving operating characteristics
(ROCs) reaching 95.7% [208]. Especially in time-stretched microscopy, broadband optical
pulses image cells without any label at extremely high frame rates through photodiode
readout and reconstruction [211–215]. Leukemia cells, RBCs, algae, and platelets can be
classiﬁed by CNNs at extremely high ﬂow speed (>10,000 cells per second) inside microﬂu-
idic ﬂow cytometry with high accuracy (>96%) [216]. High-speed, time-stretched imaging
can also couple with high-speed microﬂuidic cell classiﬁcation and real-time label-free
electrostatic cell sorting enabled by powerful GPU processing (Figure 5a) [213].
Electrodes can readily be fabricated with microﬂuidic channels and used for detection
of cells by resistance or impedance detection. Machine learning algorithms can be further
integrated into data analysis to classify objects based on their resistance or impedance
characteristics [217–221]. Joshi et al. combined ink-jet printed microﬂuidics with machine
learning algorithms to classify and differentiate three types of cancer cells based on their
impedance proﬁles [217]. A deep learning algorithm with closed-loop feedback can regulate
precise cell impedance measurement and classiﬁcation [219]. Similarly, Feng et al. combined
a microﬂuidic impedance ﬂow cytometry with machine learning, showing capability of
classifying ﬁve different cancer cells based on their membrane capacitance, cytoplasm,
conductivity, and radius, with an accuracy of 91.5% [220].
5.1.2. Cell Sorting
Flow cytometry is a cornerstone for high-throughput single cell classiﬁcation with
applications across clinical diagnostics and basic biomedical research. Further coupling the
selection function for interested target populations provide many downstream applications,
such as single cell molecular analysis, immunoassay, and selective cultivation [222].
Machine-learning-powered cell classiﬁcation in brightﬁeld and ﬂuorescence ﬂow cy-
tometry can be integrated with a microﬂuidic ﬂow cell with piezoelectric or pneumatic
actuators to hydrodynamically collect cells or droplets of interest from classiﬁcation in
real time [97,223–225]. By adapting lightweight CNNs, high-speed electronics, and GPUs,
real-time image classiﬁcation and precise timing control for cell sorting have been realized.
Aforementioned ultrahigh-speed QPI imaging systems integrated with sorting functions
have been demonstrated, reaching accuracy above 94% at 100 events per second [226–228]
(Figure 5b). By using machine learning to classify sperm and predict their DNA fragmenta-
tion index, a sperm sorter was developed that has broad applications in fertility medicine
as well as in the veterinary industry [229].
Other cell sorting methods, such as magnetic sorting and dielectrophoretic cell sorting,
have also been reported to integrate machine learning [230,231]. In particular, magnetic
immunoseparation is a well-adapted concentration and puriﬁcation method for clinical

===PAGE 13===
Micromachines 2023, 14, 826
13 of 30
diagnostics as well as biotechnology. Uslu et al. showed that SVM algorithms can assist
identiﬁcation of leukemia cells captured with light-obstructing magnetic particles with a
precision of 91.6% under 40× objective [230]. Moreover, magnetic particles are often hard
to remove completely after the sorting is completed. By using machine learning for image
analysis and classiﬁcation, the residual amount of magnetic particles can also be quantiﬁed.
5.1.3. Cell Phenotype Analysis
The possibility of deep learning is demonstrated by its ability to extract the features
related to minute optical differences contributed by biological microstructures. Fluorescence
images of subcellular structures can be predicted with CNNs from cell images taken
under brightﬁeld microscopy without any staining [232–234]. Style transfer from one
staining to another staining is also proven [235]. Such in silico labeling can also be applied
to high-speed QPI-based microﬂuidic ﬂow cytometry [236]. Moreover, deep learning
methods have demonstrated high-quality segmentation, and they can further extract
features regarding phenotypes.
The mechanical deformability and relaxation of cells can be probed by microﬂuidic
shear ﬂow or microstructure constriction [237–239]. By further applying analysis empow-
ered with machine learning, the mechanical properties of cells can be predicted from optical
images with accuracy reaching over 90% [137,240].
The health state of cells in microﬂuidic platforms for drug screening can also be
predicted and have vast applications in drug susceptibility testing, immunotherapy efﬁ-
cacy testing, and drug resistance monitoring [241–243]. For example, to maintain cellular
homeostasis, the timing and frequency of cellular metabolism, DNA duplication, and divi-
sion are tightly regulated in the cell cycle in four phases: gap 1 (G1), synthesis (S), gap 2
(G2), and mitosis (M). Conventionally, identiﬁcation of the cell cycle requires staining of
cells against molecular markers for nucleic acid and various essential proteins for DNA
replication [244]. By training CNNs on training data annotated from ﬂuorescence infor-
mation, the CNNs can be used to classify cell cycles and even predict them in brightﬁeld
images [245–248]. With the combination of microﬂuidic trapping, such a platform can
have broad applications for predicting cell cycle phenotypes in drug screening and basic
research [249,250]. Aspert et al. used microﬂuidic and deep learning for high-throughput
tracking of single cell division and emergence of mutants [250] (Figure 5c). By adapting
deep learning, analysis of the survival and phenotype changes of large amounts of single
cell data could be automated, greatly saving time, minimizing human bias, and increasing
statistical power.
Cellular senescence upon exposure to reactive oxygen species, a key contributor to ag-
ing, is also a phenotype that requires quantiﬁcation by staining, typically against senescence-
associated beta-galactosidase activity. CNNs have also been demonstrated to predict cellu-
lar senescence based on the morphology or optical quality of the cell in brightﬁeld [251,252].
By expanding the AI for phenotype prediction, cellular phenotypes in biomimetic microen-
vironments established by microﬂuidics have broad potential applications.
5.1.4. Spatiotemporal Cellular Dynamics Analysis
Deep learning methods, especially CNNs, are particularly effective in image segmenta-
tion across brightﬁeld and ﬂuorescence microscopy, outperforming conventional computer
vision methods [253–255]. Accurate segmentation accompanied by precise tracking enables
the accurate analysis of complex cellular dynamics in a stack of timelapse images and
contributes to quantitative understanding of cellular processes. For example, Bove et al.
used CNN classiﬁcation and Bayesian inference tracking for understanding the role of cell
competition in epithelial tissue maintenance [256]. Accurate segmentation by deep learning
also beneﬁts tracking cell migration in both 2D and 3D [257–260].
Through coupling with microﬂuidics, cellular dynamics can be studied in detail in
dedicated microenvironments compatible with high-resolution imaging. Single bacterium

===PAGE 14===
Micromachines 2023, 14, 826
14 of 30
evolution and bacteria population dynamics can be experimentally modeled on microﬂuidic
devices and analyzed using machine learning models [261–264].
Figure 5. Microsystems integrated with AI for cell analysis. (a) An optoﬂuidic time-stretch QPI cell
sorter based on high-speed, label-free cell classiﬁcation and sorting empowered by deep learning [213].
Reproduced under CC–BY license. (b) Frequency-multiplexed microscopy coupled with real-time ma-
chine learning processing and piezoelectric actuator for high-speed cell sorting. Reprinted from [226]
with permission from Elsevier. (c) A microﬂuidic cell trap with AI phenotype prediction for yeast
division tracking and survival analysis [250]. Reproduced under CC–BY license. (d) A deep learning
framework to automatically classify cell cycles and track lineage trees [265]. Reproduced under
CC–BY license.
Wang et al. used a deep learning-based segmentation with Bayesian ﬁltering to
track migration of cells of a 3D angiogenic vessel with an accuracy of 86.4% [266]. Cell
migration guided by physical or chemical gradients can be studied with high-throughput
microﬂuidic platforms, while AI-empowered tracking relieves humans from the tedious
task. Quantiﬁcation of cell migration and growth kinetics can be analyzed with reduced
risk of human bias [267,268]. Furthermore, accurate cell tracking across multiple cell
divisions enables building of lineage trees, and is capable of revealing the population
dynamic information of cells throughout the experimental period. Ulicna et al. combined
residual U-net, CNN classiﬁcation, and Bayesian tracking to reconstruct the cellular lineages
in thousands of hours of timelapse data and identiﬁed cell cycling heterogeneity and
correlated cyclings between cells of similar generation [265] (Figure 5d). Similar machine
learning inference can also be applied to resolving temporal dynamics of multicellular
organoids at single-cell level in 3D [269,270].
5.2. Personalized Medicine
Advances in quantitative biology in modern biomedical research spur the development
of personalized medicine, a discipline where biological variation is recognized and tailored

===PAGE 15===
Micromachines 2023, 14, 826
15 of 30
care is aimed towards every individual [271]. Microﬂuidics and AI as an integrated solution
has great potential and opportunity for personalized medicine.
Automated microﬂuidics and POCT devices can be deployed for dedicated patients
for rapid turnaround of personalized molecular diagnostics results. Moreover, patient-
derived cells, tissues, and induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) can be incorporated on a
microﬂuidic platform, also known as an organ-on-chip (OoC), recreating patient-speciﬁc
multicellular microenvironments [272]. The OoC has broad potential, from being a clinical
diagnostics vehicle to a personalized drug development tool as well as a fundamental
biomedical research platform. By using human- or patient-derived cells and tissues, the re-
sults are more clinically translatable, and AI-empowered analysis can deliver prediction
of prognosis and therapy outcome [273]. Furthermore, the OoC could potentially replace
animal studies, resolving decades-long dilemmas in research ethics [274,275].
5.2.1. Integration with Molecular Bioinformatics
Microﬂuidic technologies have been adapted for genomics and transcriptomics studies,
both in the core of the sequencing platform, such as sequencing ﬂow cells of next-generation
sequencing (NGS), and sample and library preparation, such as single cell isolation using
droplet microﬂuidics [276,277]. Because many of the techniques use Poisson statistics,
by adopting machine learning algorithms in bioinformatic pipelines, the quality of library
preparation and data quality can be improved and helps advance multiomics studies such
as spatial transcriptomics and metabolomics [191,278,279]. For example, Ko et al. applied
nanoﬂuidics and machine learning to predict cancer in mice and patients using exosomal
mRNA proﬁles learned through linear discriminant analysis [280].
5.2.2. Organ-on-Chips as Human Mimetic Models
Organ-on-chips (OoCs) aim to recreate multicellular complex environments in vitro
on microﬂuidic platforms to recapitulate the complex tissue interaction with physical
and chemical gradients existing in the biological microenvironment [281]. Many OoCs
adapting human-derived primary cells, stem cells, or cell lines have been developed for
different organs models, such as brain [282,283], thyroid [284], heart [285], stomach [286],
intestine [287], lungs [288,289], liver [290], kidneys [291], pancreas [292], and bladder [293].
The complexity of OoC platforms offers many opportunities for automation and
data analysis, both of which can beneﬁt a lot from AI [294]. In particular, when patient-
speciﬁc tissues or iPSC-differentiated cells are used, OoCs have the potential to recapitulate
the human physiology and deliver personalized medicine without the need for animal
testing [295–297].
Due to the excellence in image segmentation and predictive potential, AI has started to
be integrated with OoC platforms for image analysis, correlation, and prediction of clinical
results. Paek et al. created a bone OoC as a drug-testing platform for osteoporosis. CNN-
based image segmentation provided quantitative measurements of beta-catenin translo-
cation to evaluate the efﬁcacy of the osteoporosis suppressive antibody [298] (Figure 6a).
Likewise, a blood–brain niche (BBN) chip was developed to model the extravasation of
breast cancer cells into a brain-mimetic niche [299,300]. The invasion of cancer cells through
an endothelial cell sheet was evaluated by confocal 3D tomography, and several machine
learning algorithms were benchmarked to classify the metastatic potential of the cancer
cells. The ANN was found to outperform other machine learning algorithms (Figure 6b).
Chong et al. developed a microﬂuidic multicellular coculture array for testing skin sensitiv-
ity to drugs [301]. By combining SVM and principle component analysis on image results
for several apoptosis markers, adverse cutaneous drug reactions can be predicted with the
accuracy of 87.5% and the speciﬁcity of 75%. The predictive evaluation could have huge
potential in personalized medicine to aid in preventing severe adverse reactions, such as
Steven Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis syndrome.
Alternatively, a sheet of muscle cells placedon a microﬂuidic stretching platform can
be quantitatively studied with the assistance of AI. Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) with

===PAGE 16===
Micromachines 2023, 14, 826
16 of 30
long short-term memory (LTSM) blocks were used to predict the subsequent dynamics of
muscle cells from one time point in conjunction with a CNN to predict the phenotype of
them [302] (Figure 6c).
The complexity of the immune-tumor niche also makes it a key topic suitable for
combined approach by OoC and AI analysis [303]. The interaction between dendritic cells
and leukocytes with cancer cells in a 3D microﬂuidic coculture platform can be accurately
segmented and tracked with the aid of deep learning [304–307]. Nguyen et al. constructed
an immune-competent OoC that reconstitutes cancer, immune, endothelial cells, and ﬁ-
broblasts altogether for studying immune–tumor interactions and immunomodulation of
cancer-associated ﬁbroblasts [306] (Figure 6d). The synergy between OoC and AI shows a
promising future of personalized medicine.
5.2.3. Personalized Drug Development
One key concept of personalized medicine is recognizing that individuals have biolog-
ical variations both in biochemistry and drug responses [308]. Utilization of AI for person-
alized drug optimization by both drug selection and dosage has been promising [309,310].
A microﬂuidic POCT device for MRD and an OoC for tracking cancer migratory abilities
were demonstrated for evaluation of patient-speciﬁc cancer drug efﬁcacy by combining
AI analysis [311,312]. It is expected that we will see more examples and applications
combining microﬂuidic biomimetic models integrated with AI analysis and prediction in
the future, such as integrated lab-on-chip devices for personalized diagnosis, medicine
formation, and even drug delivery [313].
Figure 6. Organ-on-chip platforms integrated with AI analysis. (a) A bone-on-chip for osteoporosis
drug testing and development [298]. Reproduced under CC–BY license. (b) A blood–brain niche
OoC for predicting the metastatic probability of brain cancer [299,300]. Adapted with permission
from [300]. (c) A muscle-on-chip with AI image analysis for quantitative understanding of muscular
cell phenotypes. Reprinted with permission from [302]. (d) An OoC to reconstitute immunocompetent
tumor microenvironment in breast cancer [305,306]. Reproduced under CC–BY license. (e) A skin-on-
chip for predicting adverse cutaneous drug reactions [301]. Components in the ﬁgure were designed
by macrovector; brgfx/Freepik.
6. Discussion and Outlook
Microﬂuidics is a rapidly advancing ﬁeld that involves manipulating small ﬂuid
volumes at the microscale. One of the key challenges in this ﬁeld is the ability to control and

===PAGE 17===
Micromachines 2023, 14, 826
17 of 30
analyze the complex ﬂuid dynamics that occur on such a small scale. In recent years, there
has been growing interest in integrating AI with microﬂuidics to address this challenge. AI
has the potential to revolutionize microﬂuidics by enabling the development of intelligent
control systems that can adapt to changing conditions in real-time. Additionally, AI-
based image analysis techniques can automatically detect, classify, and track objects of
interests in microﬂuidic systems, providing valuable insights as well as prediction of their
dynamics. The integration of AI with microﬂuidics could lead to the development of
more sophisticated lab-on-a-chip diagnostic devices, more efﬁcient and effective drug
delivery systems, and more versatile monitoring platforms. AI-empowered image analysis
delivers quantitative analysis of cells and tissues in complex OoCs and opens a new era in
quantitative biology and personalized medicine.
Overall, the advantages of integrating AI with microﬂuidics include automation,
efﬁciency, and quantitative analysis in data processing, as well as cost effectiveness due to
the low reagent consumption of microﬂuidics. AI can perform large-scale iterations and
automation of planning and executing experimental parameters. The trainability of AI
empowered it to ﬂexibly learn from data and predict even when a priori annotation is not
always available. The neural networks especially outperform conventional algorithms in
image and language recognition, which are often abundant in biomedical and clinical data,
opening possibilities to automate quantitative analysis of data that was conventionally
difﬁcult to analyze.
However, some challenges must be addressed. Firstly, robust AI algorithms and
reliable data inputs are necessary for successful integration. While recent advancements
have demonstrated the power of AI algorithms, they are often considered a “black-box”
due to their lack of explainability. To build trustworthy AI-integrated microﬂuidic systems,
it is crucial to prioritize explainability and validation because quality assurance and risk
management are of the utmost importance in medical instrumentation. Secondly, AI
operations can be computationally expensive; both training and interference demand
immense parallel processing power. Therefore, energy efﬁciency and deployability for
particular applications and their environments are essential. For example, when integrating
with a microﬂuidic POCT system in a low-resource setting, such as a rural area with
intermittent power supply, a lightweight AI on an edge computing platform may be crucial
for successful integration. Additionally, data size is a critical factor in AI performance,
which scales proportionally with the amount of the data. While combining the automation
capability of microﬂuidics and MEMS with data from existing methods for training AI
systems can be challenging, data fusion could provide a uniﬁed and comprehensive dataset
that enables AI systems for more reliable predictive analysis. Cooperation within the
scientiﬁc community for data sharing and training AI systems with federated learning can
also address the challenges of both explainability and deployability.
In summary, by integrating the compact and versatile microﬂuidic platforms with the
intelligent control and analysis with AI, we expect new breakthroughs in healthcare in the
near future, but caveats must be taken to validate the AI system for any applications and
evaluate potential risks.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, S.P. and H.-F.T.; writing—original draft preparation, S.P.,
P.-Y.C. and H.-F.T.; writing—review and editing, H.-F.T.; supervision, H.-F.T.; funding acquisition,
H.-F.T. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was funded by National Science and Technology Council, Taiwan under
grant number NSTC 111-2222-E-182-004.
Data Availability Statement: No new data were created or analyzed in this study.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.

===PAGE 18===
Micromachines 2023, 14, 826
18 of 30
Abbreviations
The following abbreviations are used in this manuscript:
AI
Artiﬁcial Intelligence
AIV
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Velocimetry
ANN
Artiﬁcial Neural Network
AST
Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing
CC-BY
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License
CFD
Computational Fluid Dynamics
CNN
Convolutional Neural Network
CTC
Circulating Tumor Cells
DM
Diabetes Mellitus
ELISA
Enzyme-Linked ImmunoSorbent Assay
FPS
Frames Per Second
GPU
Graphics Processing Unit
ICT
Information and Communication Technology
iPSC
Induced Pluripotent Stem Cell
IR
Infrared
LAMP
Loop-mediated isothermal AMPliﬁcation
MEMS
Microelectromechanical systems
MRD
Minimum Residual Disease
µTAS
Micro-Total Analysis System
OoC
Organ-on-Chip
POCT
Point-Of-Care Testing
QPI
Quantitative Phase Imaging
RBC
Red Blood Cell
RNN
Recurrent Neural Network
SNR
Signal-to-Noise Ratio
SVM
Support Vector Machine
TDM
Therapeutic Drug Monitoring
WBC
White Blood Cell
YOLO
You Only Look Once
References
1.
Whitesides, G.M. The origins and the future of microﬂuidics. Nature 2006, 442, 368–373. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2.
Stone, H.A. Introduction to Fluid Dynamics for Microﬂuidic Flows. In CMOS Biotechnology; Lee, H.; Westervelt, R.M.; Ham, D.,
Eds.; Series on Integrated Circuits and Systems; Springer: Boston, MA, USA, 2007; pp. 5–30.
3.
deMello, A.J. Control and detection of chemical reactions in microﬂuidic systems. Nature 2006, 442, 394–402. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
4.
Velve-Casquillas, G.; Le Berre, M.; Piel, M.; Tran, P.T. Microﬂuidic tools for cell biological research. Nano Today 2010, 5, 28–47.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
5.
Liu, Y.; Jiang, X. Why microﬂuidics? Merits and trends in chemical synthesis. Lab Chip 2017, 17, 3960–3978. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
6.
Nielsen, J.B.; Hanson, R.L.; Almughamsi, H.M.; Pang, C.; Fish, T.R.; Woolley, A.T. Microﬂuidics: Innovations in Materials and
Their Fabrication and Functionalization. Anal. Chem. 2020, 92, 150–168. [CrossRef]
7.
Jordan, M.I.; Mitchell, T.M. Machine learning: Trends, perspectives, and prospects. Science 2015, 349, 255–260. [CrossRef]
8.
Uhrig, R. Introduction to artiﬁcial neural networks. In Proceedings of the IECON ’95-21st Annual Conference on IEEE Industrial
Electronics, Orlando, FL, USA, 6–10 November 1995; Volume 1, pp. 33–37. [CrossRef]
9.
Schmidhuber, J. Deep learning in neural networks: An overview. Neural Netw. 2015, 61, 85–117. [CrossRef]
10.
Bishop, C.M. Neural networks and their applications. Rev. Sci. Instrum. 1994, 65, 1803–1832. [CrossRef]
11.
Ben-Nun, T.; Hoeﬂer, T. Demystifying Parallel and Distributed Deep Learning: An In-depth Concurrency Analysis. ACM Comput.
Surv. 2019, 52, 65:1–65:43. [CrossRef]
12.
Rao, Q.; Frtunikj, J. Deep learning for self-driving cars: Chances and challenges. In Proceedings of the 1st International Workshop
on Software Engineering for AI in Autonomous Systems (SEFAIS ’18), Gothenburg, Sweden, 28 May 2018; Association for
Computing Machinery: New York, NY, USA, 2018; pp. 35–38. [CrossRef]
13.
Johnson, J. Artiﬁcial intelligence & future warfare: Implications for international security. Def. Secur. Anal. 2019, 35, 147–169.
[CrossRef]
14.
Yu, T.C.; Chou, W.C.; Yeh, C.Y.; Yang, C.K.; Huang, S.C.; Tien, F.M.; Yao, C.Y.; Cheng, C.L.; Chuang, M.K.; Tien, H.F.; et al.
Automatic Bone Marrow Cell Identiﬁcation and Classiﬁcation By Deep Neural Network. Blood 2019, 134, 2084. [CrossRef]

===PAGE 19===
Micromachines 2023, 14, 826
19 of 30
15.
Lu, M.Y.; Williamson, D.F.K.; Chen, T.Y.; Chen, R.J.; Barbieri, M.; Mahmood, F. Data-efﬁcient and weakly supervised computational
pathology on whole-slide images. Nat. Biomed. Eng. 2021, 5, 555–570. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
16.
Chen, C.L.; Chen, C.C.; Yu, W.H.; Chen, S.H.; Chang, Y.C.; Hsu, T.I.; Hsiao, M.; Yeh, C.Y.; Chen, C.Y. An annotation-free
whole-slide training approach to pathological classiﬁcation of lung cancer types using deep learning. Nat. Commun. 2021, 12, 1193.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
17.
Podder, S.; Bhattacharjee, S.; Roy, A.; Podder, S.; Bhattacharjee, S.; Roy, A. An efﬁcient method of detection of COVID-19 using
Mask R-CNN on chest X-Ray images. AIMS Biophys. 2021, 8, 281–290. [CrossRef]
18.
Galan, E.A.; Zhao, H.; Wang, X.; Dai, Q.; Huck, W.T.S.; Ma, S. Intelligent Microﬂuidics: The Convergence of Machine Learning
and Microﬂuidics in Materials Science and Biomedicine. Matter 2020, 3, 1893–1922. [CrossRef]
19.
Bai, Y.; Gao, M.; Wen, L.; He, C.; Chen, Y.; Liu, C.; Fu, X.; Huang, S. Applications of Microﬂuidics in Quantitative Biology.
Biotechnol. J. 2018, 13, 1700170. [CrossRef]
20.
McIntyre, D.; Lashkaripour, A.; Fordyce, P.; Densmore, D. Machine learning for microﬂuidic design and control. Lab Chip 2022,
22, 2925–2937. [CrossRef]
21.
Renner, G.; Ekárt, A. Genetic algorithms in computer aided design. Comput.-Aided Des. 2003, 35, 709–726. [CrossRef]
22.
Oh, K.W.; Lee, K.; Ahn, B.; Furlani, E.P. Design of pressure-driven microﬂuidic networks using electric circuit analogy. Lab Chip
2012, 12, 515–545. [CrossRef]
23.
Xu, H.; Liu, R.; Choudhary, A.; Chen, W. A Machine Learning-Based Design Representation Method for Designing Heterogeneous
Microstructures. J. Mech. Des. 2015, 137. [CrossRef]
24.
Bhargava, K.C.; Thompson, B.; Iqbal, D.; Malmstadt, N. Predicting the behavior of microﬂuidic circuits made from discrete
elements. Sci. Rep. 2015, 5, 15609. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
25.
Tsur, E.E. Computer-Aided Design of Microﬂuidic Circuits. Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng. 2020, 22, 285–307. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
26.
Lore, K.G.; Stoecklein, D.; Davies, M.; Ganapathysubramanian, B.; Sarkar, S. Hierarchical Feature Extraction for Efﬁcient Design
of Microﬂuidic Flow Patterns. In Proceedings of the 1st International Workshop on Feature Extraction: Modern Questions and
Challenges at NIPS2015, Montreal, Canada, 11 December, 2015; PMLR: Cambridge, MA, USA, 2015; pp. 213–225.
27.
Stoecklein, D.; Lore, K.G.; Davies, M.; Sarkar, S.; Ganapathysubramanian, B. Deep Learning for Flow Sculpting: Insights into
Efﬁcient Learning using Scientiﬁc Simulation Data. Sci. Rep. 2017, 7, 46368. [CrossRef]
28.
Lee, X.Y.; Balu, A.; Stoecklein, D.; Ganapathysubramanian, B.; Sarkar, S. Flow Shape Design for Microﬂuidic Devices Using Deep
Reinforcement Learning. arXiv 2018. [CrossRef]
29.
Granados-Ortiz, F.J.; Ortega-Casanova, J. Machine learning-aided design optimization of a mechanical micromixer. Phys. Fluids
2021, 33, 063604. [CrossRef]
30.
Wang, J.; Zhang, N.; Chen, J.; Su, G.; Yao, H.; Ho, T.Y.; Sun, L. Predicting the ﬂuid behavior of random microﬂuidic mixers using
convolutional neural networks. Lab Chip 2021, 21, 296–309. [CrossRef]
31.
Maionchi, D.d.O.; Ainstein, L.; dos Santos, F.P.; de Souza Júnior, M.B. Computational ﬂuid dynamics and machine learning as
tools for optimization of micromixers geometry. Int. J. Heat Mass Transf. 2022, 194, 123110. [CrossRef]
32.
Zhang, N.; Liu, Z.; Wang, J. Machine-Learning-Enabled Design and Manipulation of a Microﬂuidic Concentration Gradient
Generator. Micromachines 2022, 13, 1810. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
33.
Balabanov, A.V.; Kasimov, A.M.; Popov, A.I.; Fateev, V.Y. MNM-Modelling and Creating Designs of Discrete Microﬂuidics. In
Proceedings of the 2021 14th International Conference Management of Large-Scale System Development (MLSD), Moscow,
Russian, 27–29 September 2021; pp. 1–4. [CrossRef]
34.
Lashkaripour, A.; Rodriguez, C.; Mehdipour, N.; Mardian, R.; McIntyre, D.; Ortiz, L.; Campbell, J.; Densmore, D. Machine
learning enables design automation of microﬂuidic ﬂow-focusing droplet generation. Nat. Commun. 2021, 12, 25. [CrossRef]
35.
Shahab, M.; Rengaswamy, R. Reinforcement-Learning designs droplet microﬂuidic networks.
Comput. Chem. Eng. 2022,
161, 107787. [CrossRef]
36.
Haward, S.J.; Oliveira, M.S.N.; Alves, M.A.; McKinley, G.H. Optimized Cross-Slot Flow Geometry for Microﬂuidic Extensional
Rheometry. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2012, 109, 128301. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
37.
Wang, J.; Liang, K.; Zhang, N.; Yao, H.; Ho, T.Y.; Sun, L. Automated calibration of 3D-printed microﬂuidic devices based on
computer vision. Biomicroﬂuidics 2021, 15, 024102. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
38.
Shchanikov, S.; Zuev, A.; Bordanov, I.; Danilin, S.; Lukoyanov, V.; Korolev, D.; Belov, A.; Pigareva, Y.; Gladkov, A.; Pimashkin, A.;
et al. Designing a bidirectional, adaptive neural interface incorporating machine learning capabilities and memristor-enhanced
hardware. Chaos Solitons Fractals 2021, 142, 110504. [CrossRef]
39.
Bachratý, H.; Bachratá, K.; Chovanec, M.; Janˇcigová, I.; Smiešková, M.; Kovalˇcíková, K. Applications of machine learning for
simulations of red blood cells in microﬂuidic devices. BMC Bioinform. 2020, 21, 90. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
40.
Zhang, N.; Liang, K.; Liu, Z.; Sun, T.; Wang, J. ANN-Based Instantaneous Simulation of Particle Trajectories in Microﬂuidics.
Micromachines 2022, 13, 2100. [CrossRef]
41.
Ahmed, F.; Shimizu, M.; Wang, J.; Sakai, K.; Kiwa, T. Optimization of Microchannels and Application of Basic Activation
Functions of Deep Neural Network for Accuracy Analysis of Microﬂuidic Parameter Data.
Micromachines 2022, 13, 1352.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
42.
Kutz, J.N. Deep learning in ﬂuid dynamics. J. Fluid Mech. 2017, 814, 1–4. [CrossRef]

===PAGE 20===
Micromachines 2023, 14, 826
20 of 30
43.
Brunton, S.L.; Noack, B.R.; Koumoutsakos, P. Machine Learning for Fluid Mechanics. Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech. 2020, 52, 477–508.
[CrossRef]
44.
Kochkov, D.; Smith, J.A.; Alieva, A.; Wang, Q.; Brenner, M.P.; Hoyer, S. Machine learning–accelerated computational ﬂuid
dynamics. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2021, 118, e2101784118. [CrossRef]
45.
Cai, S.; Li, H.; Zheng, F.; Kong, F.; Dao, M.; Karniadakis, G.E.; Suresh, S. Artiﬁcial intelligence velocimetry and microaneurysm-on-
a-chip for three-dimensional analysis of blood ﬂow in physiology and disease. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2021, 118, e2100697118.
[CrossRef]
46.
Zeng, X.; Xue, C.D.; Chen, K.J.; Li, Y.J.; Qin, K.R. Deep-learning-assisted extraction of height-averaged velocity from scalar signal
transport in a shallow microﬂuidic channel. Microﬂuid. Nanoﬂuidics 2022, 26, 36. [CrossRef]
47.
Chen, Q.; Deng, J.; Luo, G. Micromixing Performance and Residence Time Distribution in a Miniaturized Magnetic Reactor:
Experimental Investigation and Machine Learning Modeling. Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2023, 62, 3577–3591. [CrossRef]
48.
Sharma, H.; Das, G.; Samanta, A.N. ANN–based prediction of two-phase gas– liquid ﬂow patterns in a circular conduit. AIChE J.
2006, 52, 3018–3028. [CrossRef]
49.
Giri Nandagopal, M.S.; Selvaraju, N. Prediction of Liquid–Liquid Flow Patterns in a Y-Junction Circular Microchannel Using
Advanced Neural Network Techniques. Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2016, 55, 11346–11362. [CrossRef]
50.
Nandagopal, M.S.G.; Abraham, E.; Selvaraju, N. Advanced neural network prediction and system identiﬁcation of liquid-liquid
ﬂow patterns in circular microchannels with varying angle of conﬂuence. Chem. Eng. J. 2017, 309, 850–865. [CrossRef]
51.
Desir, P.; Chen, T.Y.; Bracconi, M.; Saha, B.; Maestri, M.; Vlachos, D.G. Experiments and computations of microﬂuidic liquid–liquid
ﬂow patterns. React. Chem. Eng. 2019, 5, 39–50. [CrossRef]
52.
Abbasi Moud, A. Recent advances in utility of artiﬁcial intelligence towards multiscale colloidal based materials design. Colloid
Interface Sci. Commun. 2022, 47, 100595. [CrossRef]
53.
Iverson, B.D.; Garimella, S.V. Recent advances in microscale pumping technologies: A review and evaluation.
Microﬂuid.
Nanoﬂuidics 2008, 5, 145–174. [CrossRef]
54.
Dressler, O.J.; Howes, P.D.; Choo, J.; deMello, A.J. Reinforcement Learning for Dynamic Microﬂuidic Control. ACS Omega 2018,
3, 10084–10091. [CrossRef]
55.
Au, A.K.; Lai, H.; Utela, B.R.; Folch, A. Microvalves and Micropumps for BioMEMS. Micromachines 2011, 2, 179–220. [CrossRef]
56.
Abe, T.; Oh-hara, S.; Ukita, Y. Adoption of reinforcement learning for the intelligent control of a microﬂuidic peristaltic pump.
Biomicroﬂuidics 2021, 15, 034101. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
57.
Abe, T.; Oh-hara, S.; Ukita, Y. Integration of reinforcement learning to realize functional variability of microﬂuidic systems.
Biomicroﬂuidics 2022, 16, 024106. [CrossRef]
58.
Shayan, M.; Bhattacharjee, S.; Song, Y.A.; Chakrabarty, K.; Karri, R. Toward Secure Microﬂuidic Fully Programmable Valve Array
Biochips. IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst. 2019, 27, 2755–2766. [CrossRef]
59.
Hajmohammadi, M.R.; Alipour, P.; Parsa, H. Microﬂuidic effects on the heat transfer enhancement and optimal design of
microchannels heat sinks. Int. J. Heat Mass Transf. 2018, 126, 808–815. [CrossRef]
60.
Miralles, V.; Huerre, A.; Malloggi, F.; Jullien, M.C. A Review of Heating and Temperature Control in Microﬂuidic Systems:
Techniques and Applications. Diagnostics 2013, 3, 33–67. [CrossRef]
61.
Rizkin, B.A.; Popovich, K.; Hartman, R.L. Artiﬁcial Neural Network control of thermoelectrically-cooled microﬂuidics using
computer vision based on IR thermography. Comput. Chem. Eng. 2019, 121, 584–593. [CrossRef]
62.
Quinn, D.; Thalheim, T.; Cichos, F. Microﬂuidics with feedback control and machine learning (Conference Presentation). In
Proceedings of the Emerging Topics in Artiﬁcial Intelligence (ETAI) 2022, San Diego, CA, USA, 21–25 August 2022; SPIE:
Bellingham, WA, USA: 2022; Volume PC12204, p. PC122040S. [CrossRef]
63.
Lewis, C.; Erikson, J.W.; Sanchez, D.A.; McClure, C.E.; Nordin, G.P.; Munro, T.R.; Colton, J.S. Use of Machine Learning with
Temporal Photoluminescence Signals from CdTe Quantum Dots for Temperature Measurement in Microﬂuidic Devices. ACS
Appl. Nano Mater. 2020, 3, 4045–4053. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
64.
Raymond, S.J.; Collins, D.J.; O’Rorke, R.; Tayebi, M.; Ai, Y.; Williams, J. A deep learning approach for designed diffraction-based
acoustic patterning in microchannels. Sci. Rep. 2020, 10, 8745. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
65.
Tang, Y.; Duan, F.; Zhou, A.; Kanitthamniyom, P.; Luo, S.; Hu, X.; Jiang, X.; Vasoo, S.; Zhang, X.; Zhang, Y. Image-based real-time
feedback control of magnetic digital microﬂuidics by artiﬁcial intelligence-empowered rapid object detector for automated
in vitro diagnostics. Bioeng. Transl. Med. 2022, e10428. [CrossRef]
66.
Zhang, S.; Wang, Y.; Onck, P.; den Toonder, J. A concise review of microﬂuidic particle manipulation methods. Microﬂuid.
Nanoﬂuidics 2020, 24, 24. [CrossRef]
67.
Fang, W.Z.; Xiong, T.; Pak, O.S.; Zhu, L. Data-Driven Intelligent Manipulation of Particles in Microﬂuidics. Adv. Sci. 2022,
10, 2205382. [CrossRef]
68.
Bazaz, S.R.; Mashhadian, A.; Ehsani, A.; Saha, S.C.; Krüger, T.; Warkiani, M.E. Computational inertial microﬂuidics: A review.
Lab Chip 2020, 20, 1023–1048. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
69.
Del Giudice, F. A Review of Microﬂuidic Devices for Rheological Characterisation. Micromachines 2022, 13, 167. [CrossRef]
70.
Su, J.; Chen, X.; Zhu, Y.; Hu, G. Machine learning assisted fast prediction of inertial lift in microchannels.
Lab Chip 2021,
21, 2544–2556. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

===PAGE 21===
Micromachines 2023, 14, 826
21 of 30
71.
Hamdi, E.; Dezhkam, R.; Shamloo, A.; Mashhadian, A. microAI: A machine learning tool for fast calculation of lift coefﬁcients in
microchannels. arXiv 2022. [CrossRef]
72.
Zhang, Y.; Zhou, A.; Chen, S.; Lum, G.Z.; Zhang, X. A perspective on magnetic microﬂuidics: Towards an intelligent future.
Biomicroﬂuidics 2022, 16, 011301. [CrossRef]
73.
Koh, J.B.Y.; Shen, X.; Marcos. Supervised Learning to Predict Sperm Sorting by Magnetophoresis. Magnetochemistry 2018, 4, 31.
[CrossRef]
74.
Ciriza, D.B.; Magazzù, A.; Callegari, A.; Iatì, M.A.; Volpe, G.; Maragò, O.M. Machine learning to enhance the calculation of
optical forces in the geometrical optics approximation. In Proceedings of the Biophotonics Congress 2021, Washington, DC, USA,
12–16 April 2021, Optica Publishing Group, Washington, DC, USA, 2021; p. AF2D.3. [CrossRef]
75.
Zhao, J.; Hou, H.; Huang, Q.Y.; Zhong, X.G.; Zheng, P.S. Design of Optical Tweezers Manipulation Control System Based on
Novel Self-Organizing Fuzzy Cerebellar Model Neural Network. Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 9655. [CrossRef]
76.
Harshbarger, C.L.; Gerlt, M.S.; Ghadamian, J.A.; Bernardoni, D.C.; Snedeker, J.G.; Dual, J. Optical feedback control loop for the
precise and robust acoustic focusing of cells, micro- and nanoparticles. Lab Chip 2022, 22, 2810–2819. [CrossRef]
77.
Yiannacou, K.; Sariola, V. Controlled Manipulation and Active Sorting of Particles Inside Microﬂuidic Chips Using Bulk Acoustic
Waves and Machine Learning. Langmuir 2021, 37, 4192–4199. [CrossRef]
78.
Yiannacou, K.; Sharma, V.; Sariola, V. Programmable Droplet Microﬂuidics Based on Machine Learning and Acoustic Manipulation.
Langmuir 2022, 38, 11557–11564. [CrossRef]
79.
Teh, S.Y.; Lin, R.; Hung, L.H.; Lee, A.P. Droplet microﬂuidics. Lab Chip 2008, 8, 198–220. [CrossRef]
80.
Pouyanfar, N.; Harofte, S.Z.; Soltani, M.; Siavashy, S.; Asadian, E.; Ghorbani-Bidkorbeh, F.; Keçili, R.; Hussain, C.M. Artiﬁcial
intelligence-based microﬂuidic platforms for the sensitive detection of environmental pollutants: Recent advances and prospects.
Trends Environ. Anal. Chem. 2022, 34, e00160. [CrossRef]
81.
Mahdi, Y.; Daoud, K. Microdroplet size prediction in microﬂuidic systems via artiﬁcial neural network modeling for water-in-oil
emulsion formulation. J. Dispers. Sci. Technol. 2017, 38, 1501–1508. [CrossRef]
82.
Crowson, M.G.; Moukheiber, D.; Arévalo, A.R.; Lam, B.D.; Mantena, S.; Rana, A.; Goss, D.; Bates, D.W.; Celi, L.A. A systematic
review of federated learning applications for biomedical data. PLoS Digit. Health 2022, 1, e0000033. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
83.
Siemenn, A.E.; Shaulsky, E.; Beveridge, M.; Buonassisi, T.; Hashmi, S.M.; Drori, I. A Machine Learning and Computer Vision
Approach to Rapidly Optimize Multiscale Droplet Generation. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2022, 14, 4668–4679. [CrossRef]
84.
Khor, J.W.; Jean, N.; Luxenberg, E.S.; Ermon, S.; Tang, S.K.Y. Using machine learning to discover shape descriptors for predicting
emulsion stability in a microﬂuidic channel. Soft Matter 2019, 15, 1361–1372. [CrossRef]
85.
Chagot, L.; Quilodrán-Casas, C.; Kalli, M.; Kovalchuk, N.M.; Simmons, M.J.H.; Matar, O.K.; Arcucci, R.; Angeli, P. Surfactant-laden
droplet size prediction in a ﬂow-focusing microchannel: A data-driven approach. Lab Chip 2022, 22, 3848–3859. [CrossRef]
86.
Gardner, K.; Uddin, M.M.; Tran, L.; Pham, T.; Vanapalli, S.; Li, W. Deep learning detector for high precision monitoring of cell
encapsulation statistics in microﬂuidic droplets. Lab Chip 2022, 22, 4067–4080. [CrossRef]
87.
Rutkowski, G.P.; Azizov, I.; Unmann, E.; Dudek, M.; Grimes, B.A. Microﬂuidic droplet detection via region-based and single-pass
convolutional neural networks with comparison to conventional image analysis methodologies.
Mach. Learn. Appl. 2022,
7, 100222. [CrossRef]
88.
Vaithiyanathan, M.; Safa, N.; Melvin, A.T. FluoroCellTrack: An algorithm for automated analysis of high-throughput droplet
microﬂuidic data. PLoS ONE 2019, 14, e0215337. [CrossRef]
89.
Durve, M.; Tiribocchi, A.; Bonaccorso, F.; Montessori, A.; Lauricella, M.; Bogdan, M.; Guzowski, J.; Succi, S. DropTrack – automatic
droplet tracking using deep learning for microﬂuidic applications. Phys. Fluids 2022, 34, 082003. [CrossRef]
90.
Zhuang, Y.; Cheng, S.; Kovalchuk, N.; Simmons, M.; Matar, O.K.; Guo, Y.K.; Arcucci, R. Ensemble latent assimilation with deep
learning surrogate model: application to drop interaction in a microﬂuidics device. Lab Chip 2022, 22, 3187–3202. [CrossRef]
91.
Hadikhani, P.; Borhani, N.; H. Hashemi, S.M.; Psaltis, D. Learning from droplet ﬂows in microﬂuidic channels using deep neural
networks. Sci. Rep. 2019, 9, 8114. [CrossRef]
92.
Arjun, A.; Ajith, R.R.; Kumar Ranjith, S. Mixing characterization of binary-coalesced droplets in microchannels using deep neural
network. Biomicroﬂuidics 2020, 14, 034111. [CrossRef]
93.
Roy, P.; House, M.L.; Dutcher, C.S. A Microﬂuidic Device for Automated High Throughput Detection of Ice Nucleation of
Snomax®. Micromachines 2021, 12, 296. [CrossRef]
94.
Liang, T.C.; Zhong, Z.; Bigdeli, Y.; Ho, T.Y.; Chakrabarty, K.; Fair, R. Adaptive Droplet Routing in Digital Microﬂuidic Biochips
Using Deep Reinforcement Learning.
In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning, Virtual,
13–18 July 2020; PMLR: Cambridge, MA, USA, 2020; pp. 6050–6060.
95.
Jiang, C.; Yang, R.Q.; Yuan, B. An evolutionary algorithm with indirect representation for droplet routing in digital microﬂuidic
biochips. Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell. 2022, 115, 105305. [CrossRef]
96.
Chu, A.; Nguyen, D.; Talathi, S.S.; Wilson, A.C.; Ye, C.; Smith, W.L.; Kaplan, A.D.; Duoss, E.B.; Stolaroff, J.K.; Giera, B. Automated
detection and sorting of microencapsulation via machine learning. Lab Chip 2019, 19, 1808–1817. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
97.
Anagnostidis, V.; Sherlock, B.; Metz, J.; Mair, P.; Hollfelder, F.; Gielen, F. Deep learning guided image-based droplet sorting for
on-demand selection and analysis of single cells and 3D cell cultures. Lab Chip 2020, 20, 889–900. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
98.
Howell, L.; Anagnostidis, V.; Gielen, F. Multi-Object Detector YOLOv4-Tiny Enables High-Throughput Combinatorial and
Spatially-Resolved Sorting of Cells in Microdroplets. Adv. Mater. Technol. 2022, 7, 2101053. [CrossRef]

===PAGE 22===
Micromachines 2023, 14, 826
22 of 30
99.
Liu, L.; Bi, M.; Wang, Y.; Liu, J.; Jiang, X.; Xu, Z.; Zhang, X. Artiﬁcial intelligence-powered microﬂuidics for nanomedicine and
materials synthesis. Nanoscale 2021, 13, 19352–19366. [CrossRef]
100. Reizman, B.J.; Jensen, K.F. Feedback in Flow for Accelerated Reaction Development. Acc. Chem. Res. 2016, 49, 1786–1796.
[CrossRef]
101. Granda, J.M.; Donina, L.; Dragone, V.; Long, D.L.; Cronin, L. Controlling an organic synthesis robot with machine learning to
search for new reactivity. Nature 2018, 559, 377–381. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
102. Zhong, J.; Riordon, J.; Wu, T.C.; Edwards, H.; Wheeler, A.R.; Pardee, K.; Aspuru-Guzik, A.; Sinton, D. When robotics met ﬂuidics.
Lab Chip 2020, 20, 709–716. [CrossRef]
103. McMullen, J.P.; Jensen, K.F. An Automated Microﬂuidic System for Online Optimization in Chemical Synthesis. Org. Process Res.
Dev. 2010, 14, 1169–1176. [CrossRef]
104. McMullen, J.P.; Stone, M.T.; Buchwald, S.L.; Jensen, K.F. An Integrated Microreactor System for Self-Optimization of a Heck
Reaction: From Micro- to Mesoscale Flow Systems. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2010, 49, 7076–7080. [CrossRef]
105. Rizkin, B.A.; Shkolnik, A.S.; Ferraro, N.J.; Hartman, R.L. Combining automated microﬂuidic experimentation with machine
learning for efﬁcient polymerization design. Nat. Mach. Intell. 2020, 2, 200–209. [CrossRef]
106. Chen, X.; Lv, H. Intelligent control of nanoparticle synthesis on microﬂuidic chips with machine learning. NPG Asia Mater. 2022,
14, 1–20. [CrossRef]
107. Krishnadasan, S.; Brown, R.J.C.; deMello, A.J.; deMello, J.C. Intelligent routes to the controlled synthesis of nanoparticles.
Lab Chip 2007, 7, 1434–1441. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
108. Orimoto, Y.; Watanabe, K.; Yamashita, K.; Uehara, M.; Nakamura, H.; Furuya, T.; Maeda, H. Application of Artiﬁcial Neural
Networks to Rapid Data Analysis in Combinatorial Nanoparticle Syntheses. J. Phys. Chem. C 2012, 116, 17885–17896. [CrossRef]
109. Ahrberg, C.D.; Wook Choi, J.; Geun Chung, B. Automated droplet reactor for the synthesis of iron oxide/gold core-shell
nanoparticles. Sci. Rep. 2020, 10, 1737. [CrossRef]
110. Mekki-Berrada, F.; Ren, Z.; Huang, T.; Wong, W.K.; Zheng, F.; Xie, J.; Tian, I.P.S.; Jayavelu, S.; Mahfoud, Z.; Bash, D.; et al.
Two-step machine learning enables optimized nanoparticle synthesis. Npj Comput. Mater. 2021, 7, 1–10. [CrossRef]
111. Tao, H.; Wu, T.; Kheiri, S.; Aldeghi, M.; Aspuru-Guzik, A.; Kumacheva, E. Self-Driving Platform for Metal Nanoparticle Synthesis:
Combining Microﬂuidics and Machine Learning. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 31, 2106725. [CrossRef]
112. Volk, A.A.; Epps, R.W.; Abolhasani, M. Accelerated Development of Colloidal Nanomaterials Enabled by Modular Microﬂuidic
Reactors: Toward Autonomous Robotic Experimentation. Adv. Mater. 2021, 33, 2004495. [CrossRef]
113. Wahl, C.B.; Aykol, M.; Swisher, J.H.; Montoya, J.H.; Suram, S.K.; Mirkin, C.A. Machine learning–accelerated design and synthesis
of polyelemental heterostructures. Sci. Adv. 2021, 7, eabj5505. [CrossRef]
114. Wang, S.; Shen, Z.; Shen, Z.; Dong, Y.; Li, Y.; Cao, Y.; Zhang, Y.; Guo, S.; Shuai, J.; Yang, Y.; et al. Machine-learning micropattern
manufacturing. Nano Today 2021, 38, 101152. [CrossRef]
115. Ali, H.S.M.; Blagden, N.; York, P.; Amani, A.; Brook, T. Artiﬁcial neural networks modelling the prednisolone nanoprecipitation
in microﬂuidic reactors. Eur. J. Pharm. Sci. 2009, 37, 514–522. [CrossRef]
116. Kirmani, A.R.; Luther, J.M.; Abolhasani, M.; Amassian, A. Colloidal Quantum Dot Photovoltaics: Current Progress and Path to
Gigawatt Scale Enabled by Smart Manufacturing. ACS Energy Lett. 2020, 5, 3069–3100. [CrossRef]
117. Chen, G.; Zhu, X.; Xing, C.; Wang, Y.; Xu, X.; Bao, J.; Huang, J.; Zhao, Y.; Wang, X.; Zhou, X.; et al. Machine Learning-Assisted
Microﬂuidic Synthesis of Perovskite Quantum Dots. Adv. Photonics Res. 2022, 4, 2200230. [CrossRef]
118. Rebollo, R.; Oyoun, F.; Corvis, Y.; El-Hammadi, M.M.; Saubamea, B.; Andrieux, K.; Mignet, N.; Alhareth, K. Microﬂuidic
Manufacturing of Liposomes: Development and Optimization by Design of Experiment and Machine Learning. ACS Appl. Mater.
Interfaces 2022, 14, 39736–39745. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
119. Damiati, S.A.; Rossi, D.; Joensson, H.N.; Damiati, S. Artiﬁcial intelligence application for rapid fabrication of size-tunable PLGA
microparticles in microﬂuidics. Sci. Rep. 2020, 10, 19517. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
120. Damiati, S.A.; Damiati, S. Microﬂuidic Synthesis of Indomethacin-Loaded PLGA Microparticles Optimized by Machine Learning.
Front. Mol. Biosci. 2021, 8, 595. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
121. Grisoni, F.; Huisman, B.J.H.; Button, A.L.; Moret, M.; Atz, K.; Merk, D.; Schneider, G. Combining generative artiﬁcial intelligence
and on-chip synthesis for de novo drug design. Sci. Adv. 2021, 7, eabg3338. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
122. Schneider, G. Automating drug discovery. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 2018, 17, 97–113. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
123. Liu, Y.; Sun, L.; Zhang, H.; Shang, L.; Zhao, Y. Microﬂuidics for Drug Development: From Synthesis to Evaluation. Chem. Rev.
2021, 121, 7468–7529. [CrossRef]
124. Popova, M.; Isayev, O.; Tropsha, A. Deep reinforcement learning for de novo drug design. Sci. Adv. 2018, 4, eaap7885. [CrossRef]
125. Bannigan, P.; Bao, Z.; Hickman, R.J.; Aldeghi, M.; Häse, F.; Aspuru-Guzik, A.; Allen, C. Machine learning models to accelerate the
design of polymeric long-acting injectables. Nat. Commun. 2023, 14, 35. [CrossRef]
126. Mejía-Salazar, J.R.; Rodrigues Cruz, K.; Materón Vásques, E.M.; Novais de Oliveira, O., Jr. Microﬂuidic Point-of-Care Devices:
New Trends and Future Prospects for eHealth Diagnostics. Sensors 2020, 20, 1951. [CrossRef]
127. Zare Harofte, S.; Soltani, M.; Siavashy, S.; Raahemifar, K. Recent Advances of Utilizing Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Lab on a Chip for
Diagnosis and Treatment. Small 2022, 18, 2203169. [CrossRef]
128. Romao, V.C.; Martins, S.A.M.; Germano, J.; Cardoso, F.A.; Cardoso, S.; Freitas, P.P. Lab-on-Chip Devices: Gaining Ground Losing
Size. ACS Nano 2017, 11, 10659–10664. [CrossRef]

===PAGE 23===
Micromachines 2023, 14, 826
23 of 30
129. Dabbagh, S.R.; Rabbi, F.; Do˘gan, Z.; Yetisen, A.K.; Tasoglu, S. Machine learning-enabled multiplexed microﬂuidic sensors.
Biomicroﬂuidics 2020, 14, 061506. [CrossRef]
130. Lee, W.; Gonzalez, A.; Arguelles, P.; Guevara, R.; Gonzalez-Guerrero, M.J.; Gomez, F.A. Thread/paper- and paper-based
microﬂuidic devices for glucose assays employing artiﬁcial neural networks. Electrophoresis 2018, 39, 1443–1451. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
131. Mercan, Ö.B.; Kılıç, V.; ¸Sen, M. Machine learning-based colorimetric determination of glucose in artiﬁcial saliva with different
reagents using a smartphone coupled µPAD. Sens. Actuators Chem. 2021, 329, 129037. [CrossRef]
132. Muñoz, H.E.; Riche, C.T.; Kong, J.E.; van Zee, M.; Garner, O.B.; Ozcan, A.; Di Carlo, D. Fractal LAMP: Label-Free Analysis of
Fractal Precipitate for Digital Loop-Mediated Isothermal Nucleic Acid Ampliﬁcation. ACS Sens. 2020, 5, 385–394. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
133. Alvarez, M.; Rahmani, E.; Jew, B.; Garske, K.M.; Miao, Z.; Benhammou, J.N.; Ye, C.J.; Pisegna, J.R.; Pietiläinen, K.H.; Halperin, E.;
et al. Enhancing droplet-based single-nucleus RNA-seq resolution using the semi-supervised machine learning classiﬁer DIEM.
Sci. Rep. 2020, 10, 11019. [CrossRef]
134. Lee, T.H.; Kwon, H.B.; Song, W.Y.; Lee, S.S.; Kim, Y.J. Microﬂuidic ultraﬁne particle dosimeter using an electrical detection
method with a machine-learning-aided algorithm for real-time monitoring of particle density and size distribution. Lab Chip
2021, 21, 1503–1516. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
135. Alapan, Y.; Kim, C.; Adhikari, A.; Gray, K.E.; Gurkan-Cavusoglu, E.; Little, J.A.; Gurkan, U.A. Sickle cell disease biochip: A
functional red blood cell adhesion assay for monitoring sickle cell disease. Transl. Res. 2016, 173, 74–91.e8. [CrossRef]
136. Praljak, N.; Iram, S.; Goreke, U.; Singh, G.; Hill, A.; Gurkan, U.A.; Hinczewski, M. Integrating deep learning with microﬂuidics
for biophysical classiﬁcation of sickle red blood cells adhered to laminin. PLoS Comput. Biol. 2021, 17, e1008946. [CrossRef]
137. Lamoureux, E.S.; Islamzada, E.; Wiens, M.V.J.; Matthews, K.; Duffy, S.P.; Ma, H. Assessing red blood cell deformability from
microscopy images using deep learning. Lab Chip 2021, 22, 26–39. [CrossRef]
138. Rizzuto, V.; Mencattini, A.; Álvarez González, B.; Di Giuseppe, D.; Martinelli, E.; Beneitez-Pastor, D.; Mañú-Pereira, M.d.M.;
Lopez-Martinez, M.J.; Samitier, J. Combining microﬂuidics with machine learning algorithms for RBC classiﬁcation in rare
hereditary hemolytic anemia. Sci. Rep. 2021, 11, 13553. [CrossRef]
139. Ellett, F.; Jorgensen, J.; Marand, A.L.; Liu, Y.M.; Martinez, M.M.; Sein, V.; Butler, K.L.; Lee, J.; Irimia, D. Diagnosis of sepsis from a
drop of blood by measurement of spontaneous neutrophil motility in a microﬂuidic assay. Nat. Biomed. Eng. 2018, 2, 207–214.
[CrossRef]
140. Kalmady, K.S.; Kamath, A.S.; Gopakumar, G.; Subrahmanyam, G.R.K.S.; Gorthi, S.S. Improved Transfer Learning through
Shallow Network Embedding for Classiﬁcation of Leukemia Cells. In Proceedings of the 2017 Ninth International Conference on
Advances in Pattern Recognition (ICAPR), Bangalore, India, 27–30 December 2017; pp. 1–6. [CrossRef]
141. Gopakumar, G.; Hari Babu, K.; Mishra, D.; Gorthi, S.S.; Sai Subrahmanyam, G.R.K. Cytopathological image analysis using
deep-learning networks in microﬂuidic microscopy. J. Opt. Soc. Am. A Opt. Image Sci. Vis. 2017, 34, 111–121. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
142. Manak, M.S.; Varsanik, J.S.; Hogan, B.J.; Whitﬁeld, M.J.; Su, W.R.; Joshi, N.; Steinke, N.; Min, A.; Berger, D.; Saphirstein, R.J.; et al.
Live-cell phenotypic-biomarker microﬂuidic assay for the risk stratiﬁcation of cancer patients via machine learning. Nat. Biomed.
Eng. 2018, 2, 761–772. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
143. Soldati, G.; Del Ben, F.; Brisotto, G.; Biscontin, E.; Bulfoni, M.; Piruska, A.; Steffan, A.; Turetta, M.; Della Mea, V. Microﬂuidic
droplets content classiﬁcation and analysis through convolutional neural networks in a liquid biopsy workﬂow. Am. J. Transl.
Res. 2018, 10, 4004–4016. [PubMed]
144. Hashemzadeh, H.; Shojaeilangari, S.; Allahverdi, A.; Rothbauer, M.; Ertl, P.; Naderi-Manesh, H. A combined microﬂuidic deep
learning approach for lung cancer cell high throughput screening toward automatic cancer screening applications. Sci. Rep. 2021,
11, 9804. [CrossRef]
145. Ayensa-Jiménez, J.; Doweidar, M.H.; Sanz-Herrera, J.A.; Doblare, M. Understanding glioblastoma invasion using physically-
guided neural networks with internal variables. PLoS Comput. Biol. 2022, 18, e1010019. [CrossRef]
146. Ni, W.; Hu, B.; Zheng, C.; Tong, Y.; Wang, L.; Li, Q.q.; Tong, X.; Han, Y. Automated analysis of acute myeloid leukemia minimal
residual disease using a support vector machine. Oncotarget 2016, 7, 71915–71921. [CrossRef]
147. Turan, B.; Masuda, T.; Lei, W.; Noor, A.M.; Horio, K.; Saito, T.I.; Miyata, Y.; Arai, F. A pillar-based microﬂuidic chip for T-cells and
B-cells isolation and detection with machine learning algorithm. ROBOMECH J. 2018, 5, 27. [CrossRef]
148. McRae, M.P.; Simmons, G.W.; Wong, J.; Shadfan, B.; Gopalkrishnan, S.; Christodoulides, N.; McDevitt, J.T. Programmable
bio-nano-chip system: A ﬂexible point-of-care platform for bioscience and clinical measurements. Lab Chip 2015, 15, 4020–4031.
[CrossRef]
149. Christodoulides, N.; De La Garza, R.; Simmons, G.W.; McRae, M.P.; Wong, J.; Newton, T.F.; Smith, R.; Mahoney III, J.J.; Hohenstein,
J.; Gomez, S.; et al. Application of programmable bio-nano-chip system for the quantitative detection of drugs of abuse in oral
ﬂuids. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2015, 153, 306–313. [CrossRef]
150. McRae, M.P.; Simmons, G.; Wong, J.; McDevitt, J.T. Programmable Bio-nanochip Platform: A Point-of-Care Biosensor System
with the Capacity To Learn. Acc. Chem. Res. 2016, 49, 1359–1368. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
151. Song, Y.; Zhao, J.; Cai, T.; Stephens, A.; Su, S.H.; Sandford, E.; Flora, C.; Singer, B.H.; Ghosh, M.; Choi, S.W.; et al. Machine
learning-based cytokine microarray digital immunoassay analysis. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2021, 180, 113088. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

===PAGE 24===
Micromachines 2023, 14, 826
24 of 30
152. Ross, G.M.S.; Filippini, D.; Nielen, M.W.F.; Salentijn, G.I. Unraveling the Hook Effect: A Comprehensive Study of High Antigen
Concentration Effects in Sandwich Lateral Flow Immunoassays. Anal. Chem. 2020, 92, 15587–15595. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
153. Banaei, N.; Moshfegh, J.; Mohseni-Kabir, A.; Houghton, J.M.; Sun, Y.; Kim, B. Machine learning algorithms enhance the speciﬁcity
of cancer biomarker detection using SERS-based immunoassays in microﬂuidic chips. RSC Adv. 2019, 9, 1859–1868. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
154. Luo, Y.; Joung, H.A.; Esparza, S.; Rao, J.; Garner, O.; Ozcan, A. Quantitative particle agglutination assay for point-of-care testing
using mobile holographic imaging and deep learning. Lab Chip 2021, 21, 3550–3558. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
155. Chen, H.; Kim, S.; Hardie, J.M.; Thirumalaraju, P.; Gharpure, S.; Rostamian, S.; Udayakumar, S.; Lei, Q.; Cho, G.; Kanakasabapathy,
M.K.; et al. Deep learning-assisted sensitive detection of fentanyl using a bubbling-microchip. Lab Chip 2022, 22, 4531–4540.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
156. Dhama, K.; Khan, S.; Tiwari, R.; Sircar, S.; Bhat, S.; Malik, Y.S.; Singh, K.P.; Chaicumpa, W.; Bonilla-Aldana, D.K.; Rodriguez-
Morales, A.J. Coronavirus Disease 2019–COVID-19. Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 2020, 33, e00028-20. [CrossRef]
157. Wiersinga, W.J.; Rhodes, A.; Cheng, A.C.; Peacock, S.J.; Prescott, H.C. Pathophysiology, Transmission, Diagnosis, and Treatment
of Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19): A Review. JAMA 2020, 324, 782–793. [CrossRef]
158. Funari, R.; Chu, K.Y.; Shen, A.Q. Detection of antibodies against SARS-CoV-2 spike protein by gold nanospikes in an opto-
microﬂuidic chip. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2020, 169, 112578. [CrossRef]
159. Jamiruddin, M.R.; Meghla, B.A.; Islam, D.Z.; Tisha, T.A.; Khandker, S.S.; Khondoker, M.U.; Haq, M.A.; Adnan, N.; Haque, M.
Microﬂuidics Technology in SARS-CoV-2 Diagnosis and Beyond: A Systematic Review. Life 2022, 12, 649. [CrossRef]
160. Li, Q.; Zhou, X.; Wang, Q.; Liu, W.; Chen, C. Microﬂuidics for COVID-19: From Current Work to Future Perspective. Biosensors
2023, 13, 163. [CrossRef]
161. Bhuiyan, N.H.; Hong, J.H.; Uddin, M.J.; Shim, J.S. Artiﬁcial Intelligence-Controlled Microﬂuidic Device for Fluid Automation
and Bubble Removal of Immunoassay Operated by a Smartphone. Anal. Chem. 2022, 94, 3872–3880. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
162. Bhuiyan, N.H.; Uddin, M.J.; Lee, J.; Hong, J.H.; Shim, J.S. An Internet-of-Disease System for COVID-19 Testing Using Saliva by an
AI-Controlled Microﬂuidic ELISA Device. Adv. Mater. Technol. 2022, 7, 2101690. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
163. Xia, T.; Fu, Y.Q.; Jin, N.; Chazot, P.; Angelov, P.; Jiang, R. AI-enabled Microscopic Blood Analysis for Microﬂuidic COVID-19
Hematology. In Proceedings of the 2020 5th International Conference on Computational Intelligence and Applications (ICCIA),
Beijing, China, 19–21 June 2020; pp. 98–102. [CrossRef]
164. Gao, Z.; Song, Y.; Hsiao, T.Y.; He, J.; Wang, C.; Shen, J.; MacLachlan, A.; Dai, S.; Singer, B.H.; Kurabayashi, K.; et al. Machine-
Learning-Assisted Microﬂuidic Nanoplasmonic Digital Immunoassay for Cytokine Storm Proﬁling in COVID-19 Patients. ACS
Nano 2021, 15, 18023–18036. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
165. Potter, C.J.; Hu, Y.; Xiong, Z.; Wang, J.; McLeod, E. Point-of-care SARS-CoV-2 sensing using lens-free imaging and a deep
learning-assisted quantitative agglutination assay. Lab Chip 2022, 22, 3744–3754. [CrossRef]
166. Wang, B.; Li, Y.; Zhou, M.; Han, Y.; Zhang, M.; Gao, Z.; Liu, Z.; Chen, P.; Du, W.; Zhang, X.; et al. Smartphone-based platforms
implementing microﬂuidic detection with image-based artiﬁcial intelligence. Nat. Commun. 2023, 14, 1341. [CrossRef]
167. Kumar, A.; Parihar, A.; Panda, U.; Parihar, D.S. Microﬂuidics-Based Point-of-Care Testing (POCT) Devices in Dealing with Waves
of COVID-19 Pandemic: The Emerging Solution. ACS Appl. Bio Mater. 2022, 5, 2046–2068. [CrossRef]
168. Ramezankhani, R.; Solhi, R.; Chai, Y.C.; Vosough, M.; Verfaillie, C. Organoid and microﬂuidics-based platforms for drug screening
in COVID-19. Drug Discov. Today 2022, 27, 1062–1076. [CrossRef]
169. Chiu, H.Y.R.; Hwang, C.K.; Chen, S.Y.; Shih, F.Y.; Han, H.C.; King, C.C.; Gilbert, J.R.; Fang, C.C.; Oyang, Y.J. Machine learning for
emerging infectious disease ﬁeld responses. Sci. Rep. 2022, 12, 328. [CrossRef]
170. Tran, N.K.; Albahra, S.; May, L.; Waldman, S.; Crabtree, S.; Bainbridge, S.; Rashidi, H. Evolving Applications of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence and Machine Learning in Infectious Diseases Testing. Clin. Chem. 2022, 68, 125–133. [CrossRef]
171. Zhang, Z.; Chen, L.; Wang, Y.; Zhang, T.; Chen, Y.C.; Yoon, E. Label-Free Estimation of Therapeutic Efﬁcacy on 3D Cancer Spheres
Using Convolutional Neural Network Image Analysis. Anal. Chem. 2019, 91, 14093–14100. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
172. Lin, S.; Hu, S.; Song, W.; Gu, M.; Liu, J.; Song, J.; Liu, Z.; Li, Z.; Huang, K.; Wu, Y.; et al. An ultralight, ﬂexible, and biocompatible
all-ﬁber motion sensor for artiﬁcial intelligence wearable electronics. Npj Flex. Electron. 2022, 6, 1–8. [CrossRef]
173. Kobayashi, H.; Lei, C.; Wu, Y.; Mao, A.; Jiang, Y.; Guo, B.; Ozeki, Y.; Goda, K. Label-free detection of cellular drug responses by
high-throughput bright-ﬁeld imaging and machine learning. Sci. Rep. 2017, 7, 12454. [CrossRef]
174. Kobayashi, H.; Lei, C.; Wu, Y.; Huang, C.J.; Yasumoto, A.; Jona, M.; Li, W.; Wu, Y.; Yalikun, Y.; Jiang, Y.; et al.
Intelligent
whole-blood imaging ﬂow cytometry for simple, rapid, and cost-effective drug-susceptibility testing of leukemia. Lab Chip 2019,
19, 2688–2698. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
175. Zhou, Y.; Yasumoto, A.; Lei, C.; Huang, C.J.; Kobayashi, H.; Wu, Y.; Yan, S.; Sun, C.W.; Yatomi, Y.; Goda, K. Intelligent classiﬁcation
of platelet aggregates by agonist type. eLife 2020, 9, e52938. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
176. Lv, J.; Deng, S.; Zhang, L. A review of artiﬁcial intelligence applications for antimicrobial resistance. Biosaf. Health 2021, 3, 22–31.
[CrossRef]
177. Poweleit, E.A.; Vinks, A.A.; Mizuno, T. Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Machine Learning Approaches to Facilitate Therapeutic Drug
Management and Model-Informed Precision Dosing. Ther. Drug Monit. 2022, 45, 143–150. [CrossRef]
178. Yu, H.; Jing, W.; Iriya, R.; Yang, Y.; Syal, K.; Mo, M.; Grys, T.E.; Haydel, S.E.; Wang, S.; Tao, N. Phenotypic Antimicrobial
Susceptibility Testing with Deep Learning Video Microscopy. Anal. Chem. 2018, 90, 6314–6322. [CrossRef]

===PAGE 25===
Micromachines 2023, 14, 826
25 of 30
179. Kim, K.; Kim, S.; Jeon, J.S. Visual Estimation of Bacterial Growth Level in Microﬂuidic Culture Systems. Sensors 2018, 18, 447.
[CrossRef]
180. Svensson, C.M.; Shvydkiv, O.; Dietrich, S.; Mahler, L.; Weber, T.; Choudhary, M.; Tovar, M.; Figge, M.T.; Roth, M. Coding of
Experimental Conditions in Microﬂuidic Droplet Assays Using Colored Beads and Machine Learning Supported Image Analysis.
Small 2019, 15, 1802384. [CrossRef]
181. Rauf, S.; Tashkandi, N.; de Oliveira Filho, J.I.; Oviedo-Osornio, C.I.; Danish, M.S.; Hong, P.Y.; Salama, K.N. Digital E. coli Counter:
A Microﬂuidics and Computer Vision-Based DNAzyme Method for the Isolation and Speciﬁc Detection of E. coli from Water
Samples. Biosensors 2022, 12, 34. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
182. Alves, V.M.; Auerbach, S.S.; Kleinstreuer, N.; Rooney, J.P.; Muratov, E.N.; Rusyn, I.; Tropsha, A.; Schmitt, C. Curated Data
In—Trustworthy In Silico Models Out: The Impact of Data Quality on the Reliability of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Models as
Alternatives to Animal Testing. Altern. Lab. Anim. 2021, 49, 73–82. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
183. Zhang, Y.; Tao, T.H. Skin-Friendly Electronics for Acquiring Human Physiological Signatures. Adv. Mater. 2019, 31, 1905767.
[CrossRef]
184. Huang, J.D.; Wang, J.; Ramsey, E.; Leavey, G.; Chico, T.J.A.; Condell, J. Applying Artiﬁcial Intelligence to Wearable Sensor Data to
Diagnose and Predict Cardiovascular Disease: A Review. Sensors 2022, 22, 8002. [CrossRef]
185. Rodríguez-Rodríguez, I.; Rodríguez, J.V.; Chatzigiannakis, I.; Zamora Izquierdo, M.A. On the Possibility of Predicting Glycaemia
‘On the Fly’ with Constrained IoT Devices in Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus Patients. Sensors 2019, 19, 4538. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
186. Sankhala, D.; Sardesai, A.U.; Pali, M.; Lin, K.C.; Jagannath, B.; Muthukumar, S.; Prasad, S. A machine learning-based on-demand
sweat glucose reporting platform. Sci. Rep. 2022, 12, 2442. [CrossRef]
187. Han, S.; Kim, T.; Kim, D.; Park, Y.L.; Jo, S. Use of Deep Learning for Characterization of Microﬂuidic Soft Sensors. IEEE Robot.
Autom. Lett. 2018, 3, 873–880. [CrossRef]
188. Kim, D.; Kim, M.; Kwon, J.; Park, Y.L.; Jo, S. Semi-Supervised Gait Generation with Two Microﬂuidic Soft Sensors. IEEE Robot.
Autom. Lett. 2019, 4, 2501–2507. [CrossRef]
189. Wang, Y.; Shan, G.; Li, H.; Wang, L. A Wearable-Sensor System with AI Technology for Real-Time Biomechanical Feedback
Training in Hammer Throw. Sensors 2023, 23, 425. [CrossRef]
190. Zhang, Y.; Hu, Y.; Jiang, N.; Yetisen, A.K. Wearable artiﬁcial intelligence biosensor networks. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2023, 219, 114825.
[CrossRef]
191. Helmy, M.; Smith, D.; Selvarajoo, K. Systems biology approaches integrated with artiﬁcial intelligence for optimized metabolic
engineering. Metab. Eng. Commun. 2020, 11, e00149. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
192. Riordon, J.; Sovilj, D.; Sanner, S.; Sinton, D.; Young, E.W.K. Deep Learning with Microﬂuidics for Biotechnology. Trends Biotechnol.
2019, 37, 310–324. [CrossRef]
193. Raji, H.; Tayyab, M.; Sui, J.; Mahmoodi, S.R.; Javanmard, M. Biosensors and machine learning for enhanced detection, stratiﬁcation,
and classiﬁcation of cells: A review. Biomed. Microdevices 2022, 24, 26. [CrossRef]
194. Yang Yu, B.; Elbuken, C.; Ren, C.L.; Huissoon, J.P. Image processing and classiﬁcation algorithm for yeast cell morphology in a
microﬂuidic chip. J. Biomed. Opt. 2011, 16, 066008. [CrossRef]
195. Huang, X.; Guo, J.; Wang, X.; Yan, M.; Kang, Y.; Yu, H. A Contact-Imaging Based Microﬂuidic Cytometer with Machine-Learning
for Single-Frame Super-Resolution Processing. PLoS ONE 2014, 9, e104539. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
196. Wang, N.; Liu, R.; Asmare, N.; Chu, C.H.; Sarioglu, A.F. Processing code-multiplexed Coulter signals via deep convolutional
neural networks. Lab Chip 2019, 19, 3292–3304. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
197. Chen, J.; Zheng, Y.; Tan, Q.; Shojaei-Baghini, E.; Zhang, Y.L.; Li, J.; Prasad, P.; You, L.; Wu, X.Y.; Sun, Y. Classiﬁcation of cell types
using a microﬂuidic device for mechanical and electrical measurement on single cells. Lab Chip 2011, 11, 3174–3181. [CrossRef]
198. Heo, Y.J.; Lee, D.; Kang, J.; Lee, K.; Chung, W.K. Real-time Image Processing for Microscopy-based Label-free Imaging Flow
Cytometry in a Microﬂuidic Chip. Sci. Rep. 2017, 7, 11651. [CrossRef]
199. Constantinou, I.; Jendrusch, M.; Aspert, T.; Görlitz, F.; Schulze, A.; Charvin, G.; Knop, M. Self-Learning Microﬂuidic Platform for
Single-Cell Imaging and Classiﬁcation in Flow. Micromachines 2019, 10, 311. [CrossRef]
200. Mikami, H.; Kawaguchi, M.; Huang, C.J.; Matsumura, H.; Sugimura, T.; Huang, K.; Lei, C.; Ueno, S.; Miura, T.; Ito, T.; et al.
Virtual-freezing ﬂuorescence imaging ﬂow cytometry. Nat. Commun. 2020, 11, 1162. [CrossRef]
201. Huang, K.; Matsumura, H.; Zhao, Y.; Herbig, M.; Yuan, D.; Mineharu, Y.; Harmon, J.; Findinier, J.; Yamagishi, M.; Ohnuki, S.; et al.
Deep imaging ﬂow cytometry. Lab Chip 2022, 22, 876–889. [CrossRef]
202. Ahmad, A.; Sala, F.; Paiè, P.; Candeo, A.; D’Annunzio, S.; Zippo, A.; Frindel, C.; Osellame, R.; Bragheri, F.; Bassi, A.; et al. On
the robustness of machine learning algorithms toward microﬂuidic distortions for cell classiﬁcation via on-chip ﬂuorescence
microscopy. Lab Chip 2022, 22, 3453–3463. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
203. Rossi, D.; Dannhauser, D.; Telesco, M.; Netti, P.A.; Causa, F. CD4+ versus CD8+ T-lymphocyte identiﬁcation in an integrated
microﬂuidic chip using light scattering and machine learning. Lab Chip 2019, 19, 3888–3898. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
204. Wang, Y.; Wang, J.; Meng, J.; Ding, G.; Shi, Z.; Wang, R.; Zhang, X. Detection of non-small cell lung cancer cells based on
microﬂuidic polarization microscopic image analysis. Electrophoresis 2019, 40, 1202–1211. [CrossRef]
205. Singh, D.K.; Ahrens, C.C.; Li, W.; Vanapalli, S.A. Label-free, high-throughput holographic screening and enumeration of tumor
cells in blood. Lab Chip 2017, 17, 2920–2932. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

===PAGE 26===
Micromachines 2023, 14, 826
26 of 30
206. Feizi, A.; Zhang, Y.; Greenbaum, A.; Guziak, A.; Luong, M.; Chan, R.Y.L.; Berg, B.; Ozkan, H.; Luo, W.; Wu, M.; et al. Rapid,
portable and cost-effective yeast cell viability and concentration analysis using lensfree on-chip microscopy and machine learning.
Lab Chip 2016, 16, 4350–4358. [CrossRef]
207. Nissim, N.; Dudaie, M.; Barnea, I.; Shaked, N.T. Real-Time Stain-Free Classiﬁcation of Cancer Cells and Blood Cells Using
Interferometric Phase Microscopy and Machine Learning. Cytom. Part A 2021, 99, 511–523. [CrossRef]
208. Hirotsu, A.; Kikuchi, H.; Yamada, H.; Ozaki, Y.; Haneda, R.; Kawata, S.; Murakami, T.; Matsumoto, T.; Hiramatsu, Y.; Kamiya,
K.; et al. Artiﬁcial intelligence-based classiﬁcation of peripheral blood nucleated cells using label-free imaging ﬂow cytometry.
Lab Chip 2022, 22, 3464–3474. [CrossRef]
209. Wu, J.L.; Xu, Y.Q.; Xu, J.J.; Wei, X.M.; Chan, A.C.; Tang, A.H.; Lau, A.K.; Chung, B.M.; Cheung Shum, H.; Lam, E.Y.; et al. Ultrafast
laser-scanning time-stretch imaging at visible wavelengths. Light. Sci. Appl. 2017, 6, e16196. [CrossRef]
210. Pirone, D.; Sirico, D.; Miccio, L.; Bianco, V.; Mugnano, M.; Ferraro, P.; Memmolo, P. Speeding up reconstruction of 3D tomograms
in holographic ﬂow cytometry via deep learning. Lab Chip 2022, 22, 793–804. [CrossRef]
211. Jiang, Y.; Lei, C.; Yasumoto, A.; Kobayashi, H.; Aisaka, Y.; Ito, T.; Guo, B.; Nitta, N.; Kutsuna, N.; Ozeki, Y.; et al. Label-free
detection of aggregated platelets in blood by machine-learning-aided optoﬂuidic time-stretch microscopy.
Lab Chip 2017,
17, 2426–2434. [CrossRef]
212. Guo, B.; Lei, C.; Kobayashi, H.; Ito, T.; Yalikun, Y.; Jiang, Y.; Tanaka, Y.; Ozeki, Y.; Goda, K. High-throughput, label-free, single-cell,
microalgal lipid screening by machine-learning-equipped optoﬂuidic time-stretch quantitative phase microscopy. Cytom. Part A
2017, 91, 494–502. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
213. Li, Y.; Mahjoubfar, A.; Chen, C.L.; Niazi, K.R.; Pei, L.; Jalali, B. Deep Cytometry: Deep learning with Real-time Inference in Cell
Sorting and Flow Cytometry. Sci. Rep. 2019, 9, 11088. [CrossRef]
214. Lee, K.C.; Wang, M.; Cheah, K.S.; Chan, G.C.; So, H.K.; Wong, K.K.; Tsia, K.K. Quantitative Phase Imaging Flow Cytometry for
Ultra-Large-Scale Single-Cell Biophysical Phenotyping. Cytom. Part A 2019, 95, 510–520. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
215. Yip, G.G.K.; Lo, M.C.K.; Yan, W.; Lee, K.C.M.; Lai, Q.T.K.; Wong, K.K.Y.; Tsia, K.K. Multimodal FACED imaging for large-scale
single-cell morphological proﬁling. APL Photonics 2021, 6, 070801. [CrossRef]
216. Wu, Y.; Zhou, Y.; Huang, C.J.; Huang, C.J.; Kobayashi, H.; Kobayashi, H.; Yan, S.; Ozeki, Y.; Wu, Y.; Sun, C.W.; et al. Intelligent
frequency-shifted optoﬂuidic time-stretch quantitative phase imaging. Opt. Express 2020, 28, 519–532. [CrossRef]
217. Joshi, K.; Javani, A.; Park, J.; Velasco, V.; Xu, B.; Razorenova, O.; Esfandyarpour, R. A Machine Learning-Assisted Nanoparticle-
Printed Biochip for Real-Time Single Cancer Cell Analysis. Adv. Biosyst. 2020, 4, 2000160. [CrossRef]
218. Honrado, C.; McGrath, J.S.; Reale, R.; Bisegna, P.; Swami, N.S.; Caselli, F. A neural network approach for real-time particle/cell
characterization in microﬂuidic impedance cytometry. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 2020, 412, 3835–3845. [CrossRef]
219. Wang, N.; Liu, R.; Asmare, N.; Chu, C.H.; Civelekoglu, O.; Sarioglu, A.F. Closed-loop feedback control of microﬂuidic cell
manipulation via deep-learning integrated sensor networks. Lab Chip 2021, 21, 1916–1928. [CrossRef]
220. Feng, Y.; Cheng, Z.; Chai, H.; He, W.; Huang, L.; Wang, W. Neural network-enhanced real-time impedance ﬂow cytometry for
single-cell intrinsic characterization. Lab Chip 2022, 22, 240–249. [CrossRef]
221. Caselli, F.; Reale, R.; Ninno, A.D.; Spencer, D.; Morgan, H.; Bisegna, P. Deciphering impedance cytometry signals with neural
networks. Lab Chip 2022, 22, 1714–1722. [CrossRef]
222. Robinson, J.P. Flow cytometry: Past and future. BioTechniques 2022, 72, 159–169. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
223. Gu, Y.; Zhang, A.C.; Han, Y.; Li, J.; Chen, C.; Lo, Y.H. Machine Learning Based Real-Time Image-Guided Cell Sorting and
Classiﬁcation. Cytometry. Part A J. Int. Soc. Anal. Cytol. 2019, 95, 499–509. [CrossRef]
224. Sesen, M.; Whyte, G. Image-Based Single Cell Sorting Automation in Droplet Microﬂuidics. Sci. Rep. 2020, 10, 8736. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
225. Lee, K.; Kim, S.E.; Doh, J.; Kim, K.; Chung, W.K. User-friendly image-activated microﬂuidic cell sorting technique using an
optimized, fast deep learning algorithm. Lab Chip 2021, 21, 1798–1810. [CrossRef]
226. Nitta, N.; Sugimura, T.; Isozaki, A.; Mikami, H.; Hiraki, K.; Sakuma, S.; Iino, T.; Arai, F.; Endo, T.; Fujiwaki, Y.; et al. Intelligent
Image-Activated Cell Sorting. Cell 2018, 175, 266–276.e13. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
227. Zhang, Y.; Ouyang, M.; Ray, A.; Liu, T.; Kong, J.; Bai, B.; Kim, D.; Guziak, A.; Luo, Y.; Feizi, A.; et al. Computational cytometer
based on magnetically modulated coherent imaging and deep learning. Light. Sci. Appl. 2019, 8, 91. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
228. Isozaki, A.; Mikami, H.; Tezuka, H.; Matsumura, H.; Huang, K.; Akamine, M.; Hiramatsu, K.; Iino, T.; Ito, T.; Karakawa, H.; et al.
Intelligent image-activated cell sorting 2.0. Lab Chip 2020, 20, 2263–2273. [CrossRef]
229. McCallum, C.; Riordon, J.; Wang, Y.; Kong, T.; You, J.B.; Sanner, S.; Lagunov, A.; Hannam, T.G.; Jarvi, K.; Sinton, D. Deep
learning-based selection of human sperm with high DNA integrity. Commun. Biol. 2019, 2, 1–10. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
230. Uslu, F.; Icoz, K.; Tasdemir, K.; Yilmaz, B. Automated quantiﬁcation of immunomagnetic beads and leukemia cells from optical
microscope images. Biomed. Signal Process. Control 2019, 49, 473–482. [CrossRef]
231. White, A.M.; Zhang, Y.; Shamul, J.G.; Xu, J.; Kwizera, E.A.; Jiang, B.; He, X. Deep Learning-Enabled Label-Free On-Chip Detection
and Selective Extraction of Cell Aggregate-Laden Hydrogel Microcapsules. Small 2021, 17, 2100491. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
232. Christiansen, E.M.; Yang, S.J.; Ando, D.M.; Javaherian, A.; Skibinski, G.; Lipnick, S.; Mount, E.; O’Neil, A.; Shah, K.; Lee, A.K.;
et al. In Silico Labeling: Predicting Fluorescent Labels in Unlabeled Images. Cell 2018, 173, 792–803.e19. [CrossRef]
233. Ounkomol, C.; Seshamani, S.; Maleckar, M.M.; Collman, F.; Johnson, G.R. Label-free prediction of three-dimensional ﬂuorescence
images from transmitted-light microscopy. Nat. Methods 2018, 15, 917–920. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

===PAGE 27===
Micromachines 2023, 14, 826
27 of 30
234. Kim, D.; Min, Y.; Oh, J.M.; Cho, Y.K. AI-powered transmitted light microscopy for functional analysis of live cells. Sci. Rep. 2019,
9, 18428. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
235. Bai, B.; Yang, X.; Li, Y.; Zhang, Y.; Pillar, N.; Ozcan, A. Deep learning-enabled virtual histological staining of biological samples.
Light. Sci. Appl. 2023, 12, 57. [CrossRef]
236. Ugawa, M.; Kawamura, Y.; Toda, K.; Teranishi, K.; Morita, H.; Adachi, H.; Tamoto, R.; Nomaru, H.; Nakagawa, K.; Sugimoto, K.;
et al. In silico-labeled ghost cytometry. eLife 2021, 10, e67660. [CrossRef]
237. Yang, D.; Zhou, Y.; Zhou, Y.; Han, J.; Ai, Y. Biophysical phenotyping of single cells using a differential multiconstriction
microﬂuidic device with self-aligned 3D electrodes. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2019, 133, 16–23. [CrossRef]
238. Xiao, W.; Xin, L.; Cao, R.; Wu, X.; Tian, R.; Che, L.; Sun, L.; Ferraro, P.; Pan, F. Sensing morphogenesis of bone cells under
microﬂuidic shear stress by holographic microscopy and automatic aberration compensation with deep learning. Lab Chip 2021,
21, 1385–1394. [CrossRef]
239. Soelistyo, C.J.; Vallardi, G.; Charras, G.; Lowe, A.R. Learning biophysical determinants of cell fate with deep neural networks.
Nat. Mach. Intell. 2022, 4, 636–644. [CrossRef]
240. Combs, C.; Seith, D.D.; Bovyn, M.J.; Gross, S.P.; Xie, X.; Siwy, Z.S. Deep learning assisted mechanotyping of individual cells
through repeated deformations and relaxations in undulating channels. Biomicroﬂuidics 2022, 16, 014104. [CrossRef]
241. Sarkar, S.; Kang, W.; Jiang, S.; Li, K.; Ray, S.; Luther, E.; Ivanov, A.R.; Fu, Y.; Konry, T. Machine learning-aided quantiﬁcation of
antibody-based cancer immunotherapy by natural killer cells in microﬂuidic droplets. Lab Chip 2020, 20, 2317–2327. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
242. Ao, Z.; Cai, H.; Wu, Z.; Hu, L.; Nunez, A.; Zhou, Z.; Liu, H.; Bondesson, M.; Lu, X.; Lu, X.; et al. Microﬂuidics guided by deep
learning for cancer immunotherapy screening. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 2022, 119, e2214569119. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
243. Honrado, C.; Salahi, A.; Adair, S.J.; Moore, J.H.; Bauer, T.W.; Swami, N.S. Automated biophysical classiﬁcation of apoptotic
pancreatic cancer cell subpopulations by using machine learning approaches with impedance cytometry.
Lab Chip 2022,
22, 3708–3720. [CrossRef]
244. Whitﬁeld, M.L.; Sherlock, G.; Saldanha, A.J.; Murray, J.I.; Ball, C.A.; Alexander, K.E.; Matese, J.C.; Perou, C.M.; Hurt, M.M.;
Brown, P.O.; et al. Identiﬁcation of Genes Periodically Expressed in the Human Cell Cycle and Their Expression in Tumors. Mol.
Biol. Cell 2002, 13, 1977–2000. [CrossRef]
245. Song, H.; Wang, Y.; Rosano, J.M.; Prabhakarpandian, B.; Garson, C.; Pant, K.; Lai, E. A microﬂuidic impedance ﬂow cytometer for
identiﬁcation of differentiation state of stem cells. Lab Chip 2013, 13, 2300–2310. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
246. Eulenberg, P.; Köhler, N.; Blasi, T.; Filby, A.; Carpenter, A.E.; Rees, P.; Theis, F.J.; Wolf, F.A. Reconstructing cell cycle and disease
progression using deep learning. Nat. Commun. 2017, 8, 463. [CrossRef]
247. Rappez, L.; Rakhlin, A.; Rigopoulos, A.; Nikolenko, S.; Alexandrov, T. DeepCycle reconstructs a cyclic cell cycle trajectory from
unsegmented cell images using convolutional neural networks. Mol. Syst. Biol. 2020, 16, e9474. [CrossRef]
248. He, Y.R.; He, S.; Kandel, M.E.; Lee, Y.J.; Hu, C.; Sobh, N.; Anastasio, M.A.; Popescu, G. Cell Cycle Stage Classiﬁcation Using Phase
Imaging with Computational Speciﬁcity. ACS Photonics 2022, 9, 1264–1273. [CrossRef]
249. Ghafari, M.; Clark, J.; Guo, H.B.; Yu, R.; Sun, Y.; Dang, W.; Qin, H. Complementary performances of convolutional and capsule
neural networks on classifying microﬂuidic images of dividing yeast cells. PLoS ONE 2021, 16, e0246988. [CrossRef]
250. Aspert, T.; Hentsch, D.; Charvin, G. DetecDiv, a generalist deep-learning platform for automated cell division tracking and
survival analysis. eLife 2022, 11, e79519. [CrossRef]
251. Kusumoto, D.; Seki, T.; Sawada, H.; Kunitomi, A.; Katsuki, T.; Kimura, M.; Ito, S.; Komuro, J.; Hashimoto, H.; Fukuda, K.; et al.
Anti-senescent drug screening by deep learning-based morphology senescence scoring. Nat. Commun. 2021, 12, 257. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
252. Heckenbach, I.; Mkrtchyan, G.V.; Ezra, M.B.; Bakula, D.; Madsen, J.S.; Nielsen, M.H.; Oró, D.; Osborne, B.; Covarrubias, A.J.; Idda,
M.L.; et al. Nuclear morphology is a deep learning biomarker of cellular senescence. Nat. Aging 2022, 2, 742–755. [CrossRef]
253. Ronneberger, O.; Fischer, P.; Brox, T. U-Net: Convolutional Networks for Biomedical Image Segmentation. In Proceedings of the
Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention–MICCAI 2015, Munich, Germany, 5–9 October 2015; Navab,
N., Hornegger, J., Wells, W.M., Frangi, A.F., Eds.; Springer International Publishing: Cham, Switzerland, 2015; Lecture Notes in
Computer Science; pp. 234–241. [CrossRef]
254. Valen, D.A.V.; Kudo, T.; Lane, K.M.; Macklin, D.N.; Quach, N.T.; DeFelice, M.M.; Maayan, I.; Tanouchi, Y.; Ashley, E.A.; Covert,
M.W. Deep Learning Automates the Quantitative Analysis of Individual Cells in Live-Cell Imaging Experiments. PLoS Comput.
Biol. 2016, 12, e1005177. [CrossRef]
255. Tsai, H.F.; Gajda, J.; Sloan, T.F.W.; Rares, A.; Shen, A.Q. Usiigaci: Instance-aware cell tracking in stain-free phase contrast
microscopy enabled by machine learning. SoftwareX 2019, 9, 230–237. [CrossRef]
256. Bove, A.; Gradeci, D.; Fujita, Y.; Banerjee, S.; Charras, G.; Lowe, A.R. Local cellular neighborhood controls proliferation in cell
competition. Mol. Biol. Cell 2017, 28, 3215–3228. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
257. Wen, C.; Miura, T.; Voleti, V.; Yamaguchi, K.; Tsutsumi, M.; Yamamoto, K.; Otomo, K.; Fujie, Y.; Teramoto, T.; Ishihara, T.; et al.
3DeeCellTracker, a deep learning-based pipeline for segmenting and tracking cells in 3D time lapse images. eLife 2021, 10, e59187.
[CrossRef]
258. Wang, A.; Zhang, Q.; Han, Y.; Megason, S.; Hormoz, S.; Mosaliganti, K.R.; Lam, J.C.K.; Li, V.O.K. A novel deep learning-based 3D
cell segmentation framework for future image-based disease detection. Sci. Rep. 2022, 12, 342. [CrossRef]

===PAGE 28===
Micromachines 2023, 14, 826
28 of 30
259. Padovani, F.; Mairhörmann, B.; Falter-Braun, P.; Lengefeld, J.; Schmoller, K.M. Segmentation, tracking and cell cycle analysis of
live-cell imaging data with Cell-ACDC. BMC Biol. 2022, 20, 174. [CrossRef]
260. Ershov, D.; Phan, M.S.; Pylvänäinen, J.W.; Rigaud, S.U.; Le Blanc, L.; Charles-Orszag, A.; Conway, J.R.W.; Laine, R.F.; Roy, N.H.;
Bonazzi, D.; et al. TrackMate 7: Integrating state-of-the-art segmentation algorithms into tracking pipelines. Nat. Methods 2022,
19, 829–832. [CrossRef]
261. Alnahhas, R.N.; Winkle, J.J.; Hirning, A.J.; Karamched, B.; Ott, W.; Josi´c, K.; Bennett, M.R. Spatiotemporal Dynamics of Synthetic
Microbial Consortia in Microﬂuidic Devices. ACS Synth. Biol. 2019, 8, 2051–2058. [CrossRef]
262. Lugagne, J.B.; Lin, H.; Dunlop, M.J. DeLTA: Automated cell segmentation, tracking, and lineage reconstruction using deep
learning. PLoS Comput. Biol. 2020, 16, e1007673. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
263. O’Connor, O.M.; Alnahhas, R.N.; Lugagne, J.B.; Dunlop, M.J. DeLTA 2.0: A deep learning pipeline for quantifying single-cell
spatial and temporal dynamics. PLoS Comput. Biol. 2022, 18, e1009797. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
264. Koldaeva, A.; Tsai, H.F.; Shen, A.Q.; Pigolotti, S. Population genetics in microchannels. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 2022, 119, e2120821119.
[CrossRef]
265. Ulicna, K.; Vallardi, G.; Charras, G.; Lowe, A.R. Automated Deep Lineage Tree Analysis Using a Bayesian Single Cell Tracking
Approach. Front. Comput. Sci. 2021, 3, 734559. [CrossRef]
266. Wang, M.; Ong, L.L.S.; Dauwels, J.; Asada, H.H. Multicell migration tracking within angiogenic networks by deep learning-based
segmentation and augmented Bayesian ﬁltering. J. Med. Imaging 2018, 5, 024005. [CrossRef]
267. Tsai, H.F.; IJspeert, C.; Shen, A.Q.
Voltage-gated ion channels mediate the electrotaxis of glioblastoma cells in a hybrid
PMMA/PDMS microdevice. APL Bioeng. 2020, 4, 036102. [CrossRef]
268. Stallmann, D.; Göpfert, J.P.; Schmitz, J.; Grünberger, A.; Hammer, B. Towards an automatic analysis of CHO-K1 suspension
growth in microﬂuidic single-cell cultivation. Bioinformatics 2021, 37, 3632–3639. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
269. Kok, R.N.U.; Hebert, L.; Huelsz-Prince, G.; Goos, Y.J.; Zheng, X.; Bozek, K.; Stephens, G.J.; Tans, S.J.; Zon, J.S.v. OrganoidTracker:
Efﬁcient cell tracking using machine learning and manual error correction. PLoS ONE 2020, 15, e0240802. [CrossRef]
270. Sugawara, K.; Çevrim, Ç.; Averof, M. Tracking cell lineages in 3D by incremental deep learning. eLife 2022, 11, e69380. [CrossRef]
271. Johnson, K.B.; Wei, W.Q.; Weeraratne, D.; Frisse, M.E.; Misulis, K.; Rhee, K.; Zhao, J.; Snowdon, J.L. Precision Medicine, AI, and
the Future of Personalized Health Care. Clin. Transl. Sci. 2021, 14, 86–93. [CrossRef]
272. Guo, S.C.; Tao, S.C.; Dawn, H. Microﬂuidics-based on-a-chip systems for isolating and analysing extracellular vesicles. J. Extracell.
Vesicles 2018, 7, 1508271. [CrossRef]
273. Ayuso, J.M.; Virumbrales-Muñoz, M.; Lang, J.M.; Beebe, D.J. A role for microﬂuidic systems in precision medicine. Nat. Commun.
2022, 13, 3086. [CrossRef]
274. Van Norman, G.A. Limitations of Animal Studies for Predicting Toxicity in Clinical Trials: Part 2: Potential Alternatives to the
Use of Animals in Preclinical Trials. JACC Basic Transl. Sci. 2020, 5, 387–397. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
275. van Berlo, D.; van de Steeg, E.; Amirabadi, H.E.; Masereeuw, R. The potential of multi-organ-on-chip models for assessment of
drug disposition as alternative to animal testing. Curr. Opin. Toxicol. 2021, 27, 8–17. [CrossRef]
276. Ma, S.; Murphy, T.W.; Lu, C. Microﬂuidics for genome-wide studies involving next generation sequencing. Biomicroﬂuidics 2017,
11, 021501. [CrossRef]
277. Zhou, W.m.; Yan, Y.y.; Guo, Q.r.; Ji, H.; Wang, H.; Xu, T.t.; Makabel, B.; Pilarsky, C.; He, G.; Yu, X.y.; et al. Microﬂuidics applications
for high-throughput single cell sequencing. J. Nanobiotechnol. 2021, 19, 312. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
278. Lamanna, J.; Scott, E.Y.; Edwards, H.S.; Chamberlain, M.D.; Dryden, M.D.M.; Peng, J.; Mair, B.; Lee, A.; Chan, C.; Sklavounos,
A.A.; et al. Digital microﬂuidic isolation of single cells for -Omics. Nat. Commun. 2020, 11, 5632. [CrossRef]
279. Heydari, A.A.; Sindi, S.S. Deep learning in spatial transcriptomics: Learning from the next next-generation sequencing. Biophys.
Rev. 2023, 4, 011306. [CrossRef]
280. Ko, J.; Bhagwat, N.; Yee, S.S.; Ortiz, N.; Sahmoud, A.; Black, T.; Aiello, N.M.; McKenzie, L.; O’Hara, M.; Redlinger, C.; et al.
Combining Machine Learning and Nanoﬂuidic Technology To Diagnose Pancreatic Cancer Using Exosomes. ACS Nano 2017,
11, 11182–11193. [CrossRef]
281. Low, L.A.; Mummery, C.; Berridge, B.R.; Austin, C.P.; Tagle, D.A. Organs-on-chips: Into the next decade. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov.
2021, 20, 345–361. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
282. Wang, Y.; Wang, L.; Guo, Y.; Zhu, Y.; Qin, J. Engineering stem cell-derived 3D brain organoids in a perfusable organ-on-a-chip
system. RSC Adv. 2018, 8, 1677–1685. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
283. Yi, H.G.; Jeong, Y.H.; Kim, Y.; Choi, Y.J.; Moon, H.E.; Park, S.H.; Kang, K.S.; Bae, M.; Jang, J.; Youn, H.; et al. A bioprinted
human-glioblastoma-on-a-chip for the identiﬁcation of patient-speciﬁc responses to chemoradiotherapy. Nat. Biomed. Eng. 2019,
3, 509–519. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
284. Carvalho, D.J.; Kip, A.M.; Romitti, M.; Nazzari, M.; Tegel, A.; Stich, M.; Krause, C.; Caiment, F.; Costagliola, S.; Moroni, L.; et al.
Thyroid-on-a-Chip: An Organoid Platform for In Vitro Assessment of Endocrine Disruption. Adv. Healthc. Mater. 2022, 2201555.
[CrossRef]
285. Zhang, F.; Qu, K.Y.; Zhou, B.; Luo, Y.; Zhu, Z.; Pan, D.J.; Cui, C.; Zhu, Y.; Chen, M.L.; Huang, N.P. Design and fabrication of
an integrated heart-on-a-chip platform for construction of cardiac tissue from human iPSC-derived cardiomyocytes and in situ
evaluation of physiological function. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2021, 179, 113080. [CrossRef]

===PAGE 29===
Micromachines 2023, 14, 826
29 of 30
286. Lee, K.K.; McCauley, H.A.; Broda, T.R.; Kofron, M.J.; Wells, J.M.; Hong, C.I. Human stomach-on-a-chip with luminal ﬂow and
peristaltic-like motility. Lab Chip 2018, 18, 3079–3085. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
287. Kasendra, M.; Tovaglieri, A.; Sontheimer-Phelps, A.; Jalili-Firoozinezhad, S.; Bein, A.; Chalkiadaki, A.; Scholl, W.; Zhang, C.;
Rickner, H.; Richmond, C.A.; et al. Development of a primary human Small Intestine-on-a-Chip using biopsy-derived organoids.
Sci. Rep. 2018, 8, 2871. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
288. Chen, M.B.; Whisler, J.A.; Fröse, J.; Yu, C.; Shin, Y.; Kamm, R.D. On-chip human microvasculature assay for visualization and
quantiﬁcation of tumor cell extravasation dynamics. Nat. Protoc. 2017, 12, 865–880. [CrossRef]
289. Dellaquila, A.; Thomée, E.K.; McMillan, A.H.; Lesher-Pérez, S.C. Chapter 4—Lung-on-a-chip platforms for modeling disease
pathogenesis. In Organ-on-a-Chip; Hoeng, J., Bovard, D., Peitsch, M.C., Eds.; Academic Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 2020;
pp. 133–180.
290. Banaeiyan, A.A.; Theobald, J.; Paukštyte, J.; Wölﬂ, S.; Adiels, C.B.; Goksör, M. Design and fabrication of a scalable liver-lobule-on-
a-chip microphysiological platform. Biofabrication 2017, 9, 015014. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
291. Ashammakhi, N.; Wesseling-Perry, K.; Hasan, A.; Elkhammas, E.; Zhang, Y.S. Kidney-on-a-chip: Untapped opportunities. Kidney
Int. 2018, 94, 1073–1086. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
292. Silva, P.N.; J. Green, B.; M. Altamentova, S.; V. Rocheleau, J. A microﬂuidic device designed to induce media ﬂow throughout
pancreatic islets while limiting shear-induced damage. Lab Chip 2013, 13, 4374–4384. [CrossRef]
293. Sharma, K.; Dhar, N.; Thacker, V.V.; Simonet, T.M.; Signorino-Gelo, F.; Knott, G.W.; McKinney, J.D. Dynamic persistence of UPEC
intracellular bacterial communities in a human bladder-chip model of urinary tract infection. eLife 2021, 10, e66481. [CrossRef]
294. Polini, A.; Moroni, L. The convergence of high-tech emerging technologies into the next stage of organ-on-a-chips. Biomater.
Biosyst. 2021, 1, 100012. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
295. De Chiara, F.; Ferret-Miñana, A.; Ramón-Azcón, J. The Synergy between Organ-on-a-Chip and Artiﬁcial Intelligence for the Study
of NAFLD: From Basic Science to Clinical Research. Biomedicines 2021, 9, 248. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
296. Petreus, T.; Cadogan, E.; Hughes, G.; Smith, A.; Pilla Reddy, V.; Lau, A.; O’Connor, M.J.; Critchlow, S.; Ashford, M.;
Oplustil O’Connor, L. Tumour-on-chip microﬂuidic platform for assessment of drug pharmacokinetics and treatment response.
Commun. Biol. 2021, 4, 1–11. [CrossRef]
297. Li, J.; Chen, J.; Bai, H.; Wang, H.; Hao, S.; Ding, Y.; Peng, B.; Zhang, J.; Li, L.; Huang, W. An Overview of Organs-on-Chips Based
on Deep Learning. Research, 2022, 2022, 9869518. . [CrossRef] [PubMed]
298. Paek, K.; Kim, S.; Tak, S.; Kim, M.K.; Park, J.; Chung, S.; Park, T.H.; Kim, J.A. A high-throughput biomimetic bone-on-a-chip
platform with artiﬁcial intelligence-assisted image analysis for osteoporosis drug testing. Bioeng. Transl. Med. 2023, 8, e10313.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
299. Oliver, C.R.; Altemus, M.A.; Westerhof, T.M.; Cheriyan, H.; Cheng, X.; Dziubinski, M.; Wu, Z.; Yates, J.; Morikawa, A.; Heth,
J.; et al. A platform for artiﬁcial intelligence based identiﬁcation of the extravasation potential of cancer cells into the brain
metastatic niche. Lab Chip 2019, 19, 1162–1173. [CrossRef]
300. Oliver, C.R.; Westerhof, T.M.; Castro, M.G.; Merajver, S.D. Quantifying the Brain Metastatic Tumor Micro-Environment using an
Organ-On-A Chip 3D Model, Machine Learning, and Confocal Tomography. J. Vis. Exp. JoVE 2020, 162, e61654. [CrossRef]
301. Chong, L.H.; Ching, T.; Farm, H.J.; Grenci, G.; Chiam, K.H.; Toh, Y.C. Integration of a microﬂuidic multicellular coculture array
with machine learning analysis to predict adverse cutaneous drug reactions. Lab Chip 2022, 22, 1890–1904. [CrossRef]
302. Jena, B.P.; Gatti, D.L.; Arslanturk, S.; Pernal, S.; Taatjes, D.J. Human skeletal muscle cell atlas: Unraveling cellular secrets utilizing
‘muscle-on-a-chip’, differential expansion microscopy, mass spectrometry, nanothermometry and machine learning. Micron 2019,
117, 55–59. [CrossRef]
303. Shannon, M.J.; Mace, E.M. Natural Killer Cell Integrins and Their Functions in Tissue Residency. Front. Immunol. 2021, 12, 647358.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
304. Parlato, S.; De Ninno, A.; Molfetta, R.; Toschi, E.; Salerno, D.; Mencattini, A.; Romagnoli, G.; Fragale, A.; Roccazzello, L.;
Buoncervello, M.; et al. 3D Microﬂuidic model for evaluating immunotherapy efﬁcacy by tracking dendritic cell behaviour
toward tumor cells. Sci. Rep. 2017, 7, 1093. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
305. Biselli, E.; Agliari, E.; Barra, A.; Bertani, F.R.; Gerardino, A.; De Ninno, A.; Mencattini, A.; Di Giuseppe, D.; Mattei, F.; Schiavoni,
G.; et al. Organs on chip approach: A tool to evaluate cancer -immune cells interactions. Sci. Rep. 2017, 7, 12737. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
306. Nguyen, M.; De Ninno, A.; Mencattini, A.; Mermet-Meillon, F.; Fornabaio, G.; Evans, S.S.; Cossutta, M.; Khira, Y.; Han, W.;
Sirven, P.; et al.
Dissecting Effects of Anti-cancer Drugs and Cancer-Associated Fibroblasts by On-Chip Reconstitution of
Immunocompetent Tumor Microenvironments. Cell Rep. 2018, 25, 3884–3893.e3. [CrossRef]
307. Comes, M.C.; Casti, P.; Mencattini, A.; Di Giuseppe, D.; Mermet-Meillon, F.; De Ninno, A.; Parrini, M.C.; Businaro, L.; Di Natale,
C.; Martinelli, E. The inﬂuence of spatial and temporal resolutions on the analysis of cell-cell interaction: A systematic study for
time-lapse microscopy applications. Sci. Rep. 2019, 9, 6789. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
308. Mathur, L.; Ballinger, M.; Utharala, R.; Merten, C.A. Microﬂuidics as an Enabling Technology for Personalized Cancer Therapy.
Small 2020, 16, 1904321. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
309. Blasiak, A.; Khong, J.; Kee, T. CURATE.AI: Optimizing Personalized Medicine with Artiﬁcial Intelligence. SLAS Technol. 2020,
25, 95–105. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

===PAGE 30===
Micromachines 2023, 14, 826
30 of 30
310. Blasiak, A.; Truong, A.T.L.; Wang, P.; Hooi, L.; Chye, D.H.; Tan, S.B.; You, K.; Remus, A.; Allen, D.M.; Chai, L.Y.A.; et al.
IDentif.AI-Omicron: Harnessing an AI-Derived and Disease-Agnostic Platform to Pinpoint Combinatorial Therapies for Clinically
Actionable Anti-SARS-CoV-2 Intervention. ACS Nano 2022, 16, 15141–15154. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
311. Ahuja, K.; Rather, G.M.; Lin, Z.; Sui, J.; Xie, P.; Le, T.; Bertino, J.R.; Javanmard, M. Toward point-of-care assessment of patient
response: A portable tool for rapidly assessing cancer drug efﬁcacy using multifrequency impedance cytometry and supervised
machine learning. Microsyst. Nanoeng. 2019, 5, 1–11. [CrossRef]
312. Mencattini, A.; Di Giuseppe, D.; Comes, M.C.; Casti, P.; Corsi, F.; Bertani, F.R.; Ghibelli, L.; Businaro, L.; Di Natale, C.; Parrini,
M.C.; et al. Discovering the hidden messages within cell trajectories using a deep learning approach for in vitro evaluation of
cancer drug treatments. Sci. Rep. 2020, 10, 7653. [CrossRef]
313. Owh, C.; Ho, D.; Loh, X.J.; Xue, K. Towards machine learning for hydrogel drug delivery systems. Trends Biotechnol. 2023,
41, 476–479. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.