===PAGE 1===
Intelligent Microfluidics: The Convergence of Machine Learning and Microfluidics in Materials
Science and Biomedicine
Galan, E.A.; Zhao, H; Wang, X.; Dai, Q.; Huck, W.T.S.; Ma, S.
2020, Article / Letter to editor (Matter, 3, 6, (2020), pp. 1893-1922)
Doi link to publisher: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matt.2020.08.034
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Version of the following full text: Publisher’s version
Published under the terms of article 25fa of the Dutch copyright act. Please follow this link for the
Terms of Use: https://repository.ubn.ru.nl/page/termsofuse
Downloaded from: https://hdl.handle.net/2066/227680
Download date: 2026-08-25
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Note:
To cite this publication please use the final published version (if applicable).

===PAGE 2===
Review
Intelligent Microﬂuidics: The Convergence
of Machine Learning and Microﬂuidics
in Materials Science and Biomedicine
Edgar A. Galan,1,2 Haoran Zhao,1,2 Xukang Wang,3 Qionghai Dai,2,3,4 Wilhelm T.S. Huck,5
and Shaohua Ma1,2,4,*
SUMMARY
Microﬂuidics permit the automated manipulation of ﬂuids at the
microscale with high throughput and spatiotemporal precision,
enabling the generation of large, multidimensional datasets. Ma-
chine intelligence provides powerful predictive tools with the ability
to learn from data. The analysis of microﬂuidics-generated data via
machine learning has been applied in a variety of contexts, achieving
impressive results. Here, we elaborate on the potential of operating
microﬂuidic platforms via closed-loop data-driven models by
leveraging multimodal monitoring and data-acquisition instrumen-
tation. We believe this approach will provide a robust framework
for fundamental explorations in materials science and biomedicine,
with implications in ﬁelds such as drug discovery, nanomaterials,
in vitro organ modeling, and developmental biology. We identify
challenges and propose research strategies in the context of the
prediction and optimization of chemical reactions and materials syn-
theses and the development of the next generation of more robust
and functional organs-on-chips and emerging organoids-on-chips.
INTRODUCTION
The success of the miniaturization of microelectronics and computers inspired the
initial developments in microﬂuidics.1 Analogously, microﬂuidic chips now offer
the capabilities of entire laboratories in small footprints.2 Microﬂuidics operate by
manipulating liquids within networks of microchannels with dimensions on the order
of micrometers. Fluids can take the form of monophasic and multiphasic ﬂows or
discrete microdroplets in the femto- to microliter scale (1015 to 106 L). Owing to
their small dimensions, microﬂuidic systems display a range of unique physical char-
acteristics.3 As viscous forces dominate over inertial forces, ﬂows at low Reynolds
number exhibit laminar proﬁles. Thus, mass, momentum, and heat transport in the
direction normal to the ﬂow are restricted to the molecular mechanisms of diffusivity,
viscosity, and thermal conductivity, respectively. The superior heat and mass trans-
port enabled by the high surface-area-to-volume ratio allows for high control over
reaction conditions and shorter reaction times.4 Moreover, simple microfabrication
techniques using polydimethylsiloxane5 permit quick fabrication of chips with
inherent chemical inertness, thermostability, and low toxicity. Therefore, the trans-
lation of techniques and analyses from the macro- to the microscale confers attrac-
tive advantages such as parallelization, multiplexing, high throughput, high spatio-
temporal precision, and substantially reduced sample and energy consumption. This
versatility has resulted in landmark technologies such as lab-on-a-chip for high-
throughput single-cell analyses,6 droplet barcoding for high-throughput DNA and
Progress and potential
The synergistic convergence of
microﬂuidics and machine
learning enables ample and
varied applications. Microﬂuidic
chips are economical devices
capable of extracting large
amounts of data with minimal
reagent consumption. Meanwhile,
machine learning offers
computational tools with the
ability to learn from data and
make accurate predictions to
guide and optimize scientiﬁc
research. Currently, microﬂuidic
devices are mostly operated
manually and data are analyzed
post experiment. The
development and integration of
on-chip multimodal
instrumentation will give rise to
the next generation of
autonomous platforms operated
via data-driven models. This
review summarizes progress on
the monitoring and control of
microﬂuidic systems via machine
learning, discusses advances on
the implementation of
microﬂuidics and machine
learning in materials science and
biomedicine, and identiﬁes
challenges and opportunities for
research in the emerging ﬁeld of
intelligent microﬂuidics.
Matter 3, 1893–1922, December 2, 2020 ª 2020 Elsevier Inc. 1893
ll

===PAGE 3===
RNA sequencing,7,8 organ-on-a-chip9 and organoids10 for drug discovery11 and
personalized medicine,12 and microreactors4 for the synthesis of materials13 and
the study of chemical reactions.14
Artiﬁcial intelligence has seen a rapid growth during the last decade, offering statis-
tical models capable of accurate predictions to accelerate research discoveries with
minimal human intervention. Machine learning is an approach to artiﬁcial intelli-
gence based on a framework of algorithms that learn from data without requiring
direct programming. Discrete computing elements, so-called artiﬁcial neurons,15–
17 compose networks18 that enable construction of feature representations from
high-dimensional inputs and generalization of knowledge to be applied in unseen
scenarios. Deep learning, an emergent class of machine learning, leverages complex
neural networks composed of multiple representation layers to enable autonomous
interpretation of raw data, achieving unprecedented prediction accuracy. Deep
learning has revolutionized ﬁelds such as computer vision and natural language pro-
cessing.19 In the chemical and biological sciences, artiﬁcial intelligence is reshaping
research methodologies for applications such as chemical exploration,20,21 predic-
tion of chemical reactivity22 and reaction performance,23 prediction and design of
synthetic24,25 and retrosynthetic routes,26 automated reaction optimization,27 accel-
erated materials discovery,28–30 materials characterization,31 label-free cell classiﬁ-
cation,32,33 detection of DNA modiﬁcations,34 study of oncogenic differentiation,35
prediction of protein structure,36 and diagnosis of medical images,37,38 providing
scientists with powerful tools for feature extraction, classiﬁcation, and prediction.
Microﬂuidics has become integral to the chemical and biological sciences.39–41 Its
high throughput enables the automated generation of large and detailed datasets.
As a result, manual classiﬁcation and labeling have become unfeasible for applica-
tions that produce complex, multidimensional data. This represents a fertile scenario
for the implementation of artiﬁcial intelligence. Machine-learning-based data anal-
ysis and microﬂuidics complement each other and provide a robust framework for
scientiﬁc exploration. This approach has recently been exploited with great success
in materials science for automated particle synthesis and optimization,42 and the
study of complex chemical reactions;14 and in biomedicine, for intelligent image-
activated cell sorting,43 prediction of risk stratiﬁcation of cancer,44 and the label-
free detection of aggregated platelets,45 circulating tumor cells,46 and exosomes;47
while both ﬁelds beneﬁt from technologies such as the automated detection and
sorting of microencapsulation.48
While most applications leveraging machine intelligence in microﬂuidics focus on
data analysis post experiment, there are beneﬁts and opportunities in the use of ma-
chine intelligence to design and operate microﬂuidic devices. Basic developments
have been demonstrated in recent years, including the monitoring and control of
volumetric ﬂow rates to mitigate the effects of long-term operation,49 the determi-
nation of the chemical composition and ﬂuid properties of microdroplets,50 the pre-
diction of microdroplet size51 and stability,52 and the computer-aided design of
microﬂuidic chips to generate ﬂow shapes on demand.53
Here, we discuss the progress leading to the convergence of microﬂuidics and arti-
ﬁcial intelligence. We introduce the emergence of intelligent approaches for data-
driven design and operation of microﬂuidic systems. We then focus on the predic-
tion of organic synthetic and retrosynthetic routes, automated high-throughput
experimentation platforms in chemistry, and modeling of artiﬁcial biological organs,
which hold great relevance in ﬁelds such as drug discovery,54 functional materials,55
1Shenzhen International Graduate School (SIGS),
Tsinghua University, Shenzhen, China
2Tsinghua-Berkeley Shenzhen Institute (TBSI),
Tsinghua University, Shenzhen, China
3Department of Automation, Tsinghua University,
Beijing, China
4Institute of Brain and Cognitive Sciences,
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
5Institute of Molecules and Materials, Radboud
University, Nijmegen, The Netherlands
*Correspondence:
ma.shaohua@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matt.2020.08.034
ll
1894 Matter 3, 1893–1922, December 2, 2020
Review

===PAGE 4===
and developmental biology.56 Finally, we provide perspectives on these topics and
elucidate challenges and opportunities for research.
We observe that as chemistry and materials science embrace the use of machine
intelligence, the adoption of microﬂuidic chips as platforms for high-throughput exper-
imentation could further accelerate chemical exploration and synthesis at reduced costs.
Meanwhile, as microﬂuidics have contributed to the birth of organs-on-chips57 and
organoids-on-chips,58 the imminent integration of machine intelligence represents an
unexploited resource that is expected to expand avenues for fundamental research
and increase the robustness and functionality of current models. Both these technolo-
gies will beneﬁt from the adoption of data-driven intelligent microﬂuidic platforms
integrating microscopy, spectroscopy, and multisensing instrumentation speciﬁc to
the microﬂuidics environment. This approach will beneﬁt applications such as the design
and discovery of materials and synthetic routes, the study and optimization of chemical
reactions, the modeling and control of organs/organoids-on-chips, and the study of the
mechanisms of organogenesis (Figure 1).
THE CONVERGENCE OF MICROFLUIDICS AND MACHINE
INTELLIGENCE
The multiplexing capacity and high throughput of microﬂuidics coupled to various
monitoring techniques such as optical imaging, spectroscopy, or electrochemical
sensing enable data acquisition at unprecedented rates. The increasing accuracy
of laboratory instrumentation and the range of available techniques that can be
Figure 1. Applications of Intelligent Microﬂuidics in Materials Science and Biomedicine
ll
Matter 3, 1893–1922, December 2, 2020 1895
Review

===PAGE 5===
integrated into microﬂuidic platforms result in large datasets of multidimensional
data. Machine learning can exploit such information to autonomously detect pat-
terns in complex nonlinear spaces and assist researchers to derive meaningful in-
sights. Artiﬁcial neural networks18 are fundamental machine-learning algorithms
that will be referred to numerous times during this review. Figure 2B depicts this
concept with the schematic of a typical feedforward network, where each neuron
is computed as the linear combination of the weights of the neurons in the previous
layer (Figure 2A). For a comprehensive introduction to machine learning, we direct
the reader to an excellent book by Goodfellow et al.59
The Emergence of Data-Driven Microﬂuidics
Microﬂuidic devices currently rely on researchers to empirically set the initial condi-
tions of operation and then monitor and tune parameters throughout experiments to
reach and maintain stable conditions that generate reproducible data. Inconsistent
experimental conditions in polydimethylsiloxane-based microﬂuidic devices can be
introduced by multiple factors including fabrication discrepancies, clogging, bubble
formation, chemical impurities, or effects of long-term operation such as tempera-
ture and pressure ﬂuctuations, surface fouling,60 and substrate deformation.61
These variations can affect chemical synthesis by changing solution concentrations62
or biological analyses because of adsorption of hydrophobic small molecules.63
A
B
Figure 2. Artiﬁcial Neural Networks
(A) Schematic of a discrete computing linear element (neuron) that receives the inputs x1,/,xn with
associated weights w1,/,wn and computes a weighed sum over all inputs as Pn
i = 1 = wixi + ::: +
wnxn. The net input sum passes through a sigmoid activation function that outputs a real number
within G1, with respect to a threshold value t = 0.
(B) Schematic of a neural network with one output layer and one hidden layer receiving the inputs
x1,/,xn with weights W. Each element h1,/,hn in the hidden layer is computed as a nonlinear
transformation of all the inputs and has a vector of associated weights w. The network has y1,/,yn
outputs, which take the values of all the elements in the hidden layer as inputs.
ll
1896 Matter 3, 1893–1922, December 2, 2020
Review

===PAGE 6===
In this section, we discuss emergent research on the use of machine intelligence
coupled with optical microscopy in microﬂuidic chips. This approach has been
used to predict droplet size51 and stability,52 to determine droplet chemical compo-
sition and ﬂuid properties,50 and to monitor and rectify ﬂow rates and droplet sizes
to avoid undesired effects derived from long-term operation or bubble formation.49
Real-Time Control of the Microﬂuidic Environment
Autoencoders convert multiple inputs into low-dimensional feature representations
(codes) that can be processed and subsequently decoded to reconstruct the in-
puts.64 These algorithms are mainly employed in unsupervised machine-learning
models, where unsupervised refers to approaches that do not require labeled
data. Khor et al.52 utilized a deep convolutional autoencoder to learn the shape of
droplets in a concentrated emulsion as an eight-dimensional code and used it to
predict whether the droplets would break or stabilize (Figure 3). Four out of the eight
dimensions in the code could be interpreted as drop skewness, elongation, throat
size, and surface curvature; these parameters were demonstrated to play a signiﬁ-
cant role in determining emulsion stability.
Meanwhile, the control of volumetric ﬂow rates in a microﬂuidic channel via machine
learning was explored by Dressler et al.49 The authors employed both a deep
Q-Network,65 a deep neural network leveraging end-to-end reinforcement learning,
and a model-free episodic control,66 an algorithm inspired on hippocampal learning
and memory. Reinforcement learning is an approach to training algorithms based on
a system of cumulative rewards.67 The authors trained their models by randomly varying
the ﬂow rates of the dispersed and continuous phases of a double laminar ﬂow and a wa-
ter-in-oil emulsion within a range of 0.5–10 mL/min. An optical microscope enabled the
algorithms to monitor the volumetric ﬂow rates. At each iteration, a scalar reward was
assigned in function of the current and the desired interface location or droplet size
and, accordingly, the algorithms increased or decreased the ﬂow rates of each phase
in 0.5-mL/min steps. In this way, the two models learned optimal ﬂow rates and were
able to position an interface at an arbitrary location in a double laminar ﬂow (Figures
4A, 4C, and 4E) and control the sizes of water-in-oil droplets (Figures 4B, 4D, and 4F).
Two trained human testers performed the same tasks, and their performance was
compared with that of the algorithms. In the control of the interface location, the
Figure 3. Prediction of Drop Instability in a Microﬂuidics Device
(A) Schematic of a microﬂuidic device in ﬂow-focusing geometry.
(B) Series of images depicting a (red) droplet undergoing instability and break-up within a
concentrated emulsion. The scalebar is 30 mm.
(C) Schematic of the machine-learning process for the prediction of drop instability.
Adapted with permission from Khor et al.52 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry.
ll
Matter 3, 1893–1922, December 2, 2020 1897
Review

===PAGE 7===
deep Q-Network increased its performance algorithmically up to human level over
27 h. Meanwhile, the model-free episodic control reached peak performance within
2 h, stabilizing at 90% of human level. In the control of droplet sizes, both algorithms
achieved consistent above human-level performance, but the model-free episodic
control achieved it within few minutes while the deep Q-Network required 20 h of
training. It is noted that the network architecture played a signiﬁcant role in the per-
formance of each speciﬁc task, suggesting that it is advisable to implement and test
different models to ﬁnd the most appropriate to solve a given task.
Convolutional neural networks68 transform inputs into stacks of feature maps using
a combination of convolutional and pooling layers to enable powerful image
recognition. Hadikhani et al.50 used a deep convolutional neural network to
predict the volumetric ﬂow rate and the concentrations of each component in wa-
ter/isopropanol droplets within a microﬂuidic chip. The network was trained on im-
ages of droplets at different ﬂow rates and water/isopropanol concentrations,
which allowed it to learn to recognize morphological features associated with
ﬂow rate and isopropanol dilution. The authors suggested that this approach could
be used to assess the chemical compositions of different mixtures in droplet micro-
reactors or to predict other ﬂuid properties such as surface tension or viscosity;
these parameters are important in the synthesis of a variety of microparti-
cles.13,69–74 The prediction of ﬂuid properties has also been approached from a
different perspective. Mahdi and Daoud51 demonstrated that a deep neural
network can predict the droplet sizes in a water-in-oil emulsion by using the
dimensionless capillary and Reynolds numbers of the two phases as inputs. These
numbers are associated with the ﬂow rate, diameter of the microchannel, and ﬂuid
properties such as viscosity and surface tension. These studies suggest that is plau-
sible to infer several ﬂuid properties in microﬂuidic chips through a combination of
optical monitoring and neural networks.
Figure 4. Control of the Volumetric Flow in a Microﬂuidic Chip via Reinforcement Learning
(A and B) Schematic of a microﬂuidic channel in (A) coﬂowing conﬁguration, generating a double
laminar ﬂow, and (B) ﬂow-focusing conﬁguration, generating microdroplets. The dotted line
denotes the sampling area; the distance d is the parameter to optimize.
(C and D) Example image frames captured during the training phase from the microchannels in (C)
coﬂowing and (D) ﬂow-focusing conﬁgurations. The scalebars are 150 mm.
(E and F) Examples of complete reward characterizations as a function of the ﬂow rates of the
dispersed (fr1) and continuous phase (fr2) for the (E) control of an interface location and (F) droplet
sizes.
Adapted with permission from Dressler et al.49 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.
ll
1898 Matter 3, 1893–1922, December 2, 2020
Review

===PAGE 8===
We noticed that both Dressler et al.49 and Hadikhani et al.50 reported that their pre-
dictive models did not maintain accuracy across devices, despite these having iden-
tical designs. This can be attributed to fabrication discrepancies, surface treatment
variations, surface-wetting effects, polydimethylsiloxane aging, and even tubing
connections and microscope positioning. Training the algorithms on multiple de-
vices could mitigate this issue, although the researchers did not explore this possi-
bility. In summary, it has been demonstrated that optical monitoring coupled to ma-
chine intelligence can be employed to predict ﬂuid properties and enable the
closed-loop control of parameters within microﬂuidic chips. It is worth noting the
following. (1) The works discussed herein required only the use of a standard optical
microscope and a camera as the data-acquisition instrumentation, (2) although these
tasks could be performed using simpler algorithms. For instance, basic measure-
ments on ﬂuids within microﬂuidic channels such as ﬂow speed or droplet size can
be performed by video processing75 while volumetric ﬂow rates can be controlled
via a robust controller76 or a classic proportional-integral-derivative controller. (3)
Nevertheless, the signiﬁcance of these works lies in the proof-of-concept of the
use of machine learning to solve practical problems in the microﬂuidics environment.
Similar approaches could be later translated to the solution of more complex tasks.
Deep-Learning-Aided Device Design: Flow Sculpting
We have discussed the use of machine learning to predict or rectify parameters dur-
ing the operation of microﬂuidic devices. In addition, it is also possible to predict
optimal device designs that deliver bespoke behaviors. This concept has recently
been demonstrated in the domain of ﬂow sculpting.77 Flow sculpting is a technique
for shaping the cross-section of ﬂows within microﬂuidic channels via ﬂuid inertia. It
ﬁnds applications in nanomaterials manufacture or microﬂuidic manipulation, for
example in the generation of microﬁbers and microstructures with arbitrary tridi-
mensional geometries73,78,79 or in the selective transport of microparticle-laden
ﬂows around cells or particles.80
Flow sculpting uses micropillars inside a microchannel to passively shape the cross-sec-
tion of a ﬂow in an inertial regime deﬁned by a Reynolds number of 1 < Re < 100. The
induced deformations under these conditions are time independent, being only a func-
tion of the channel and pillar geometries, pillar locations, and the Reynolds number of
the ﬂuid.77 Figure 5A illustrates the concept of ﬂow sculpting, where a sequence of mi-
cropillars is arranged along a microchannel and deforms the ﬂuid cross-section to
generate a speciﬁc ﬂow shape. Provided with enough space between pillars, the
induced deformations on the ﬂuid cross-section are commutative, i.e., pillar-induced de-
formations are independent and cumulative; individual pillars can thus be arranged in
sequences where their effects add successively and their order does not inﬂuence the
resultant ﬂow shape. Therefore, a library of pillar and channel geometries, pillar locations
within the microchannel, and their inﬂuence on a ﬂuid cross-section can be precomputed
and stored for rapid access. However, a full library of the design space is still computa-
tionally infeasible, since, for a sequence of ns pillars, the total of possible combinations is
deﬁned as nc = nns
p , where np is the number of different pillar conﬁgurations. To over-
come this issue, Stoecklein et al.53 used high-dimensional model representation81 to
generate a sample from the design space of possible ﬂow-sculpting outputs from a com-
bination of eight pillar diameters in four possible locations (32 total pillar conﬁgurations)
with sequences of seven pillars (nc z 34 3 109). Principal component analysis82 was used
to reduce the dimensionality of the space to solve the many-to-one problem inherent to
this system (i.e., many different pillar combinations can generate a certain ﬂow shape;
principal component analysis projects outputs in a space where similar ﬂow shapes
are close to each other). Finally, advection maps of simulated cross-sectional ﬂow shapes
ll
Matter 3, 1893–1922, December 2, 2020 1899
Review

===PAGE 9===
were used to train a deep convolutional neural network to aid the design of microﬂuidic
chips that produce a demanded ﬂow shape (Figure 5B).
One of the advantages of deep learning for solving similar problems in microﬂuidics
is that the design space is ﬁnite and time independent. For example, the space
deﬁned by Stoecklein et al.53 has a number of solutions that can be precomputed
and depend on the quantity of elements (e.g., pillars, geometries, and locations).
We can observe that: (1) techniques for intelligent sampling and nonlinear dimen-
sionality reduction can be adopted to reduce computational costs while maintaining
a high accuracy in the prediction of outputs outside the training set; (2) deep learning
can solve similar scientiﬁc inverse problems that have no analytical solution or cer-
tainty of a unique solution; (3) similar methodologies can be implemented not
only in the design of microﬂuidic devices, but also in the operation of reconﬁgurable
microﬂuidic devices; and (4) although reconﬁgurability in microﬂuidics is yet to be
achieved, machine learning could be the key to quickly reaping the beneﬁts of re-
conﬁgurable devices by automatically modulating parameters of operation as a
function of different conﬁgurations.
Machine Intelligence and Microﬂuidics in Chemistry and Materials Science
In this section, we ﬁrst elaborate on the use of machine-learning statistical models
trained on scientiﬁc databases, which has proved valuable, but highlight the neces-
sity of generating standardized data. Next, we introduce the implementation of
data-driven robotic platforms for chemical exploration, which lead to the require-
ments for further optimization and miniaturization. The use of microﬂuidics as
data-driven platforms for high-throughput experimentation in chemical synthesis
represents a nascent yet highly promising ﬁeld; the current progress is discussed
at the end of this section.
Figure 5. Prediction of Pillar Sequences for On-Demand Flow Shapes via Deep Learning
(A) Schematic of three inlet ﬂows within a microchannel. The deformations induced by each pillar in
the sequence contribute to a net deformation at the end of the microchannel.
(B) Pixel representations of ﬂow cross-sections (advection maps) are input to a convolutional neural
network. Convolutional and pooling layers extract features that can be mapped to micropillar
sequences that generate speciﬁc ﬂow shapes.
Adapted with permission from Stoecklein et al.53 Copyright 2017, Springer Nature.
ll
1900 Matter 3, 1893–1922, December 2, 2020
Review

===PAGE 10===
Computer-Aided Synthesis
The rational synthesis of molecules is a fundamental task in organic chemistry and
materials science. For this, one must be able to predict chemical reactions in both
ways, that is, to determine the reaction mechanism and product from a set of starting
molecules (synthesis) as well as determining the required molecules and reaction
mechanism to yield a target product (retrosynthesis). Since the number of organic
chemical compounds that could potentially exist is nearly inﬁnite, the development
of predictive tools for synthetic routes is a nontrivial challenge of great importance in
organic chemistry.
Chemometrics, a ﬁeld of science founded on the mining and statistical analysis of
large quantities of chemical multivariate data, originated in the late 1960s,83 quickly
followed by the integration of machine-intelligence-based statistical models to solve
a variety of problems in chemistry, including the design of organic synthetic routes.84
Early algorithms relied on empirical calculations and manual coding of reactivity
rules by experienced chemists,85 an approach that achieved impressive results,
but limited scalability and automation.
In the previous decade, artiﬁcial neural networks were introduced as a solution to
learn from published databases to predict chemical reactions. For example, Kayala
et al.86 considered a mechanistic approach using graph-based molecular represen-
tations to describe chemical reactions as electronic interactions between idealized
molecular orbitals. A feedforward network was trained on a set of manually coded
reaction rules and, given a set of reactants and conditions, the model could predict
the productive mechanism with an accuracy of 89.05% (Figure 6A). Molecular ﬁnger-
prints are number sequences representing a series of descriptors that encode fea-
tures describing the structure of molecules (e.g., the presence of amides or the types
of carbon bonds) (Figure 6B). Wei et al.87 concatenated the ﬁngerprints of reactants
and reagents and used these data as the input for a neural network, which classiﬁed
reactions of alkyl halides and alkenes and predicted the structure of the product with
accuracies of 85% and 50%, respectively (Figure 6C). Recently, Sandfort et al.22
advanced the ﬁeld of molecular ﬁngerprints with a model based only on the molec-
ular structure of the reactant, from which a series of 24 features was extracted (Fig-
ure 6D). This simplistic approach in combination with random forest, a supervised
algorithm for both classiﬁcation and regression,88 enabled the prediction of
HOMO-LUMO (highest occupied molecular orbital-lowest unoccupied molecular
orbital) gaps, enantioselectivities, yields, and relative conversion.
Graph neural networks leverage representations based on the distances between
pairs of nodes in graphical data and are useful in modeling complex structures.36
Segler and Waller90 constructed a knowledge graph of 14.4 million molecules and
8.2 million reactions reported in the literature using extended-connectivity ﬁnger-
prints.91 The data were used to train a graph-based neural network, which predicted
reaction products with an accuracy of 67.5%. The authors later combined the exten-
ded-connectivity ﬁngerprints with graph expert rules and a deep neural network
trained on 3.5 million published reactions (Figure 6E).26 This improved the predic-
tion of synthesis and retrosynthesis, with accuracies of 95% and 97%, respectively.
Segler et al.25 subsequently evaluated the combination of their previous symbolic
rules with Monte Carlo tree search,92 an algorithm for ﬁnding optimal decisions
through the random sampling of the domain space to construct search trees. The au-
thors trained a deep neural network on all reactions published in organic chemistry
and compared its performance with a state-of-the-art rule-based system, predicting
as many molecules but in much shorter times.
ll
Matter 3, 1893–1922, December 2, 2020 1901
Review

===PAGE 11===
Figure 6. Approaches to Molecule Representation and Reaction Prediction
(A) Mechanistic reaction prediction. Electron sources and sinks within reactants are identiﬁed, and electron-ﬁlled and electron-unﬁlled unreactive sites
are predicted and ﬁltered out. Filled and unﬁlled molecular orbitals are combined, and the reactions are ranked based on productivity scores.
(B) Generation of molecular ﬁngerprints. A vector of structural descriptors is constructed from yes/no (0 or 1) queries about a series of molecule features.
(C) Fingerprint-based reaction prediction. Reactant and reagent ﬁngerprints are concatenated and input to a neural network that predicts the
probability of reaction types and products.
(D) Multiple ﬁngerprint features. Multiple molecular ﬁngerprints are concatenated to predict a range of reaction outcomes from a single representation.
(E) Neural-symbolic approach. Synthetic and retrosynthetic transformation rules are predicted from occurring functional groups using counted
extended-connectivity ﬁngerprints (ECFP4).
(F) Edit-based model. Representations based on four edits (Hs lost, Hs gained, bonds lost, and bonds gained) are summed and used to rank possible
reaction types.
Adapted with permission from: (A) Kayala et al.86 Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. (B and D) Sandfort et al.22 Copyright 2020, Elsevier Inc. (C)
Wei et al.87 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (E) Segler and Waller.26 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (F)
Coley et al.89 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.
ll
1902 Matter 3, 1893–1922, December 2, 2020
Review

===PAGE 12===
A challenge in mining databases is that reaction parameters are inconsistently re-
ported and results are biased toward high-yield reactions. Therefore, neural net-
works are undertrained on what constitutes an unproductive reaction. Coley
et al.89 approached this issue by supplementing a dataset with automatically gener-
ated unproductive reactions. Molecule representations were based on atom
bonding occurring at the reaction core (Figure 6F), while reaction templates were
selected based on the products that could be produced given a set of reactants—
a process called forward enumeration. The reactions that could yield the products
but were not reported in the literature were included in the training set as unproduc-
tive reactions. This approach showed an accuracy of 71.8% for the prediction of
products.
Despite extensive work and consistent progress on the use of machine intelligence
to predict synthetic routes, signiﬁcant challenges remain. For example, Kayala
et al.86 obtained their data from a rule-based system based on an undergraduate
chemistry curriculum, and although the results reported by Segler and Waller26
are impressive, their hybrid model also relied on reaction rules. Scaling rule-based
systems requires to manually revisit a large quantity of existing rules to add excep-
tions. Also, these models cannot generalize, being only able to predict reactions
within the rule set. The work by Wei et al.87 covered only 16 basic reaction types
involving alkanes containing 10 or fewer carbon atoms with a single functional
group. Meanwhile, the models of both Wei et al.87 and Segler and Waller90 were
restricted to predict binary reactions. Coley et al.89 used forward enumeration
with only the 1,689 most frequent reaction templates from a total of 140,284 tem-
plates. Additionally, parameters such as temperature, pressure, solvents, and reac-
tion times, as well as reactant, catalyst, and reagent concentration, were excluded
from the training set amid the inconsistency of their presence in the database. We
conclude that: (1) the lack of sufﬁciently detailed and standardized data on existing
scientiﬁc databases represents a challenge that limits the scalability and predictive
power of machine learning models; (2) while forward reaction templates are a pop-
ular solution to quickly categorize reaction types, the coverage of the model is
restricted by the quality and quantity of the templates selected, compromising
generalizability; and (3) devising representations for chemical reactivity with high
physical relevance is an open challenge with opportunities for improvement.
Automated Experimentation via Modular Robots
The discovery and optimization of chemical synthesis is a costly and time-consuming
process that involves signiﬁcant manual labor. The past few years saw new ap-
proaches that made use of robots guided by machine-intelligence statistical models
to automate the exploration and discovery of chemical syntheses. Coley et al.93
extended their previous work89 with the development of a robotic platform for the
automated execution of predicted synthetic routes via ﬂow chemistry. A feedfor-
ward network was trained on reactions and templates from a chemical database to
generalize known reactions to new substrates through retrosynthetic transforma-
tions and modulation of the reaction conditions. A robotic arm assembled modular
components and reagent lines into the ﬂow path for the execution of speciﬁc reac-
tion types on demand. However, this approach still requires the supervision and
input of additional details by an expert chemist.
A desirable feature in the automated exploration and discovery of chemical reactions is
the capability of systems to be trained and optimized using self-generated standardized
experimental data. Granda et al.21 developed a robot integrating real-time nuclear
magnetic resonance, mass spectrometry, and attenuated total-reﬂection infrared
ll
Matter 3, 1893–1922, December 2, 2020 1903
Review

===PAGE 13===
spectroscopy for the automatic monitoring and classiﬁcation of reaction mixtures (Fig-
ures 7A and 7B). The robot was equipped with six reaction vessels, which allowed it to
perform 36 experiments per day. First, random reactions were performed and classiﬁed
binarily as reactive or nonreactive based on their spectra by using a support-vector
machine.94 This information was stored in a database. A linear discriminant analysis
algorithm95 was then trained on the resultant data to construct the chemical space of
the reaction, while empty space (unexplored reactivity) was predicted. The robot thus
performed and analyzed the reaction with the highest probabilistic score for reactivity.
The model was retrained with the data from the last reaction performed (highest reac-
tivity), and the whole process was iterated as required (Figure 7C).
Figure 7. Automated Chemical Exploration via Modular Robots
(A) Schematic of the conﬁguration of the chemical inputs (valves represented as colored dots),
reaction vessels, and online analytical instrumentation. A solvent (MeCN) is used as an example.
(B) Photograph of the robotic platform. The spectra of reaction mixtures are recorded via
atmospheric pressure chemical ionization (APCI)-mass spectrometry (MS), nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR), and attenuated total-reﬂection infrared spectroscopy (ATR-IR).
(C) The platform starts a search by performing a set of random reactions while analytical
instrumentation monitors the reaction outcomes. A support-vector machine (SVM) classiﬁes
reaction mixtures as reactive or nonreactive to construct the reaction space and stores the results in
a database. A linear discriminant analysis (LDA) algorithm infers the distribution of probabilities for
the entire chemical space to determine the reaction with the highest yield, which is then performed
and analyzed by the robot.
Adapted with permission from Granda et al.21 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature.
ll
1904 Matter 3, 1893–1922, December 2, 2020
Review

===PAGE 14===
In advancing the paradigm of automated intelligent chemical exploration and syn-
thesis, Steiner et al.24 implemented a modular robotic system driven by a chemical
programming language to convert the key four stages of organic synthesis protocols
(reaction, workup, isolation, and puriﬁcation) into abstract representations. The
‘‘Chemputer’’ is a chemical search engine composed of automated bench equip-
ment and closed-loop machine-learning-based data processing. The platform
performs reactions in round-bottomed ﬂasks and uses a combination of both unsu-
pervised and supervised algorithms—principal component analysis and a support-
vector machine with partial least-square discriminant analysis59—to explore the
chemical space and determine optimal reaction conditions. This represents a step
toward a universal format to describe chemical reactions and execute them automat-
ically on a batch scale. Reactions published in the literature can be added to the
database after being coded in the Chemputer’s programming language.
The exploration and discovery of synthetic routes also allows the invention and syn-
thesis of materials with user-deﬁned properties. Li et al.96 developed the ‘‘Materials
Acceleration Operation System,’’ a platform for automated materials characteriza-
tion and synthesis. The system can be trained remotely via virtual reality and can
also be operated and monitored online through a web interface. It also uses its
unique programming language and compiler to code reaction protocols, while rein-
forcement learning optimizes the reactions by searching for the experimental
conditions that yield the demanded material properties. The modules for materials
characterization included in-line photoluminescence, optical absorption spectros-
copy, computer vision, and X-ray diffraction. With fabrication modules such as a
three-dimensional (3D) printer, vacuum and gas chambers, light irradiation, and
various forms of liquid handling, these components can be set up on demand by a
robotic arm.
We can observe that these robotic platforms still rely signiﬁcantly on human input,
training, and veriﬁcation. For instance, Duros et al.97 compared the performance
of robots with that of humans in the context of the discovery of gigantic polyoxome-
talate clusters. A random forest classiﬁer searching for crystallization space proved
nine times more productive when compared with a random search, and six times
more productive than a human manual search. However, the researchers later found
that a combination of machine learning with human intuition was more efﬁcient than
either one alone,98 outlining the current importance of assisting scientists rather
than substituting them.
Microﬂuidics as Platforms for High-Throughput Experimentation
The processes of chemical exploration and materials synthesis often require hun-
dreds to thousands of experiments to derive meaningful results. For example, it is
estimated that about 560 experiments are needed to explore the synthetic space
of a new perovskite compound. This number grows exponentially as more precur-
sors are considered; however, it can be more than halved by leveraging machine-
learning approaches.28 Meanwhile, microﬂuidics are capable of accelerating organic
reactions in microdroplets.99 As shown by Fallah-Araghi et al.,100 the reaction rate
(product concentration per unit of time) is inversely proportional to the droplet
radius. The authors went on to demonstrate the acceleration of the synthesis of a
ﬂuorescent imine conﬁned in 2.5-pL droplets by a factor of 45 compared with its
bulk counterpart.100
The small dimensions in microchannels facilitate the control of phenomena such
as heat and mass transport, allowing for rapid heating, cooling, or mixing, and
ll
Matter 3, 1893–1922, December 2, 2020 1905
Review

===PAGE 15===
precisely deﬁned reaction conditions.4 Therefore, microﬂuidic chips can effectively
mimic the physics of batch and industrial-scale processes while enabling one to
optimize, visualize, and study reactions in more detail. While the self-optimization
of microﬂuidic reactors has been demonstrated via Simplex101 or Kriging algo-
rithms,102 machine learning can provide advantages such as generalization and
the ability to study the reaction parameters. Zhou et al.42 utilized deep reinforce-
ment learning to develop a self-optimized microﬂuidic droplet reactor. The system
was demonstrated for four reactions involving two reagents that were mixed and
sprayed with an electrospray ionization source at a high voltage and pressure.
The reaction yields were monitored via mass spectrometry while the ﬂow rate,
voltage, and pressure were optimized (all other reaction conditions remained con-
stant). This information allowed the achievement of optimal reaction conditions
within 30 min by using a stochastic recurrent neural network, an architecture de-
signed to maintain the history of sequences through iterations.103 The algorithm
was pretrained on simulated reaction data and started the optimization search
from a randomized exploration, followed by the calculation of the unexplored re-
action space from a probability distribution. The model showed the ability to
generalize by learning from similar or even dissimilar reaction mechanisms. This
enabled the researchers to decipher the roles of the parameters inﬂuencing the
yield—i.e., ﬂow rate, voltage, and pressure.
Some reactions are associated with considerable hazards and environmental
footprints. Recently, Rizkin et al.14 developed an automated high-throughput mi-
croﬂuidic reactor with integrated in situ infrared thermography and used it to
study a polymerization reaction (Figure 8). By employing kinetic modeling and
Bayesian regularization backpropagation104 (a technique used for determining
the relevance of network inputs to turn off irrelevant weights and prevent over-
ﬁtting) the authors demonstrated the rapid estimation of the reaction space to-
pology of a zirconocene-based alkene polymerization catalyst, which allowed
them to investigate its fundamental kinetic parameters. The authors were able
to reduce the chemical waste by two orders of magnitude and the chemical dis-
covery process from weeks to hours while limiting the manual handling of haz-
ardous chemicals.
Although the design of microﬂuidic reactors has been limited to speciﬁc reactions,
it could be possible to miniaturize the concept of a universal platform demon-
strated with the Chemputer.105 Microﬂuidic valves, pumps, and mixers are easily
fabricated,106 while a variety of materials is available to fulﬁll speciﬁc reaction re-
quirements.107 However, while there have been advances in modular microﬂuidics
through the development of discrete elements,108 efforts toward a data-driven uni-
versal microﬂuidic reactor are yet to commence. We conclude the following. (1)
The rapid prototyping, low production costs, and low reagent consumption
make microﬂuidics appropriate platforms for data-driven chemical exploration
and synthesis optimization. However, the combination of microﬂuidics and ma-
chine learning is at an early, though rapidly growing, stage. (2) The development
of modular microﬂuidic components to perform common reactions or single reac-
tion steps will enable the development of reconﬁgurable platforms in a fashion
similar to that which can be implemented using ﬂow and batch chemistry equip-
ment. (3) This approach will boost the interest on using microﬂuidic devices as
high-throughput experimentation platforms on chemistry and materials science
and facilitate the construction of a universal microﬂuidic reactor. (4) Meanwhile,
machine learning is prepared to exploit newly generated datasets to predict and
optimize chemical reactions.23,28,109,110
ll
1906 Matter 3, 1893–1922, December 2, 2020
Review

===PAGE 16===
Machine Intelligence and Microﬂuidics in Biomedicine
The importance and implications of materials science and biomedicine in modern
society are vast and tightly related.39–41 For instance, the joint development of these
technologies and their convergence with machine intelligence holds great relevance
Figure 8. Microﬂuidic System for High-Throughput Chemical Experimentation
(A) Process ﬂow diagram of an automated thermographic microreactor. Left to right: inlet
manifolds with solvent tank, ultra-high purity (UHP) nitrogen supply, electromagnetic dosing
pumps (DP), reagent reservoirs (R), pressure controller (EF OB2), mass ﬂow meters (EF), bypass
valves, infrared (IR) camera, vacuum enclosure, and outlet manifold.
(B) Computer-aided design of a microﬂuidic chip for the study of metallocene catalysts. The device
includes a reactor, ﬂuid interface connections, Peltier cells for heating/cooling, and a liquid cooling
block for thermal stability.
Adapted with permission from Rizkin et al.14 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature.
ll
Matter 3, 1893–1922, December 2, 2020 1907
Review

===PAGE 17===
in ﬁelds such as personalized medicine and drug discovery.54 Microﬂuidics provides
a toolbox to construct high-throughput experimentation platforms for both chemical
synthesis4 and drug screening,111 while machine learning closes the loop with a
data-driven framework for automation and optimization. The ability to predict and
optimize the synthesis of complex organic molecules is essential to the discovery
and mass production of pharmaceutical compounds, while organs-on-chips and or-
ganoids-on-chips serve as high-throughput screening platforms that can evaluate
the efﬁcacy and safety of drug compounds.112 In this section, we brieﬂy elaborate
on general progress on the combination of machine intelligence and microﬂuidics
in biomedicine. We then focus on organs/organoids-on-chips and introduce emer-
gent research incorporating machine intelligence.
Machine-Learning-Based Recognition and Sorting in Microﬂuidic Chips
In biomedicine, the recent decade has seen the rise in popularity of applying ma-
chine-learning approaches to microﬂuidics-generated data.113 Liquid biopsies are
a minimally invasive alternative to tissue biopsies that can be processed in microﬂui-
dic chips. Emergent technologies leveraging machine learning and optical probing
in microﬂuidic chips for label-free disease diagnoses are quickly gaining popularity.
For example, Singh et al.46 used a combination of microﬂuidics, machine learning,
and holographic microscopy for the label-free detection of circulating tumor cells
in blood. The platform screened cells ﬂowing through a microchannel and gener-
ated a digital ﬁngerprint for each cell based on their diameter and intensity proﬁles.
As little as 10 cancer cells per milliliter could be detected with an error of 0.001%.
Exosomes are nanosized extracellular vesicles released by cells that can contain ge-
netic information. Ko et al.47 demonstrated the label-free screening of plasma sam-
ples to diagnose pancreatic cancer at its early stages by using a microﬂuidic chip
integrating immunomagnetic sorting114 to capture exosomes into nanopore traps
and an on-chip quantitative polymerase chain reaction to sequence exosomal
mRNA. Linear discriminant analysis95 was used to ﬁnd mRNA signatures to predict
whether the sample was obtained from a cancer-bearing individual.
Alternatively, cells from tissue biopsies can be dissociated and cultured in a micro-
ﬂuidic chip for high-throughput analyses at the single-cell level. Manak et al.44 ob-
tained phenotypic biomarkers for breast and prostate cancer cells via automated
live- and ﬁxed-cell microscopy. Machine vision algorithms quantiﬁed the biomarkers
in the images, and the resulting data were classiﬁed by a machine-learning statistical
model to predict cancer severity and the risk of postsurgical adverse pathologies.
Meanwhile, similar approaches translate to the diagnosis of other types of disorders.
For example, Jiang et al.45 demonstrated the label-free morphology-based detec-
tion of aggregated platelets in blood to predict the diagnosis of thrombotic
disorders. By imaging single cells via optoﬂuidic time-stretch microscopy,115 a ma-
chine-learning algorithm could differentiate aggregated platelets from single plate-
lets and white blood cells with an accuracy of 96.6%.
The combination of machine learning and microﬂuidics is also revolutionizing tradi-
tional ﬂow cytometry. Recently, Isozaki et al.43 demonstrated an intelligent image-
activated cell sorting microﬂuidic chip capable of sorting single live cells from het-
erogeneous populations in a high-throughput manner by combining hydrodynamic
cell focusing, optical microscopy, ﬂuorescence-activated cell sorting, and a deep
convolutional neural network. This technology holds the potential to unravel hetero-
geneous relations between cellular genotype and phenotype, mapping morpho-
chemical features to gene expression and cell behavior to identify new drug targets
or abnormal cell populations in disease.
ll
1908 Matter 3, 1893–1922, December 2, 2020
Review

===PAGE 18===
Machine Intelligence for In Vitro Organ Modeling: Organs- and Organoids-on-
a-Chip
The convergence of microﬂuidic chip fabrication and tissue engineering gave rise to
organs-on-a-chip.9 These platforms proved more precise than traditional well plate-
based cell culture techniques for mimicking physiologically relevant organ func-
tions.116 Microﬂuidics enables the culture of deﬁned distributions of cell varieties
in engineered cytoarchitectures, provides dynamic control of the microenvironment
to recreate mechanobiological stimuli,117 and introduces controlled perfusion to
mimic vascular and interstitial ﬂows. These features provide essential cues to reca-
pitulate cell-cell, cell-tissue, and tissue-tissue interactions, which inﬂuence organ
development and function by preserving natural gene expression, morphology,
polarity, and cellular crosstalk. Hence, the accurate reproduction of these in vivo
physiological signals in vitro is among the most critical challenges to develop
organ-on-a-chip models. To date, a number of organ models have been demon-
strated including brain,118 heart,119 intestine,120 kidney,121 liver,122 lung,112 and tu-
mor.123 An ultimate aim is to interconnect multiple organs to simulate systemic
behaviors in so-called body- or human-on-a-chip systems.124
Organoids are in vitro organ models based on self-organized, stem cell-derived or-
ganotypic multicellular constructs.10 Their ability to reproduce organ function and
microarchitecture, along with their high production scalability125 and long viability
(over a year126), makes them promising platforms for modeling organ homeostasis,
development, and disease.56,127 Their applications include the study of viral infec-
tions,128 genetic and neurodegenerative diseases,129,130 and drug screening;11
additionally, organoids can be transplanted as therapeutic agents for regenerative
medicine with the ability to replace native tissues and regenerate damaged or-
gans.131 Figure 9 illustrates different strategies to obtain organs-on-chips and orga-
noids. The main difference between these models is that organs-on-chips are con-
structed by deliberately arranging stem cells or differentiated organ-speciﬁc cells
on artiﬁcial microstructures that mimic the local organotypic architecture (Figure 9A),
whereas organoids are self-organized constructs usually grown either from embry-
onic or induced pluripotent stem cells129 (Figure 9B) or from normal132 or tumor tis-
sues133 (Figure 9C).
Precise dynamic cues from the biochemical and biophysical microenvironment are
necessary for normal organogenesis. The use of microﬂuidic platforms for the pro-
duction, control, and analysis of organoids has emerged to address the need for
controllable culture conditions and automation while intrinsically increasing
throughput and scalability. The convergence of microﬂuidics and organoids origi-
nated the organoids-on-a-chip technology.58 These systems allow the high-
throughput screening of drug compounds in physiologically relevant organ models
that have been demonstrated to successfully capture intra- and interpatient hetero-
geneity12 or predict the responses of parental tumors to chemotherapy.135 This fa-
cilitates the preclinical evaluation of patient-speciﬁc responses to therapies, with
the potential to accelerate the discovery and development of new compounds while
reducing the time, costs, and variability associated with cell and animal models.
The potential beneﬁts of integrating machine intelligence into artiﬁcial biological or-
gans have been hinted at by researchers previously.136,137 Nowadays, this conver-
gence represents an emerging ﬁeld, and although real-time monitoring and control
has not yet been achieved, researchers are starting to make use of machine-learning
algorithms in applications such as organoid characterization138 and prediction of
drug toxicity.139
ll
Matter 3, 1893–1922, December 2, 2020 1909
Review

===PAGE 19===
With the biomedical data available in public repositories growing rapidly and the devel-
opment of powerful techniques for high-throughput single-cell sequencing, machine in-
telligence becomes increasingly promising to tackle the complex challenges associated
with the analysis of the highly heterogeneous and multidimensional omics data.138,140
Wu et al.138 utilized machine learning to assess the cellular diversity of human pluripotent
stem cell-derived kidney organoids generated from two popular protocols,141,142 which
allowed comparison and optimization of the culturing conditions (Figure 10). The au-
thors performed single-cell transcriptomics to measure the gene activity of 83,130 cells
from 65 organoids. In brief, cells were dissociated, encapsulated, labeled, and
sequenced via microﬂuidics droplet barcoding7,8 to produce a library of barcoded ge-
nomes that are traceable to their cells of origin.143 Principal component analysis with
graph-based clustering was then used to categorize cell types based on their gene
expression, revealing that 10%–20% of nonrenal cells, mostly neurons, were present
in the organoids. Pseudotemporal ordering144 allowed the authors to trace back lineage
relationships during organoid differentiation to identify the factors inﬂuencing fate deci-
sion, i.e., transcription factors, ligands, and receptors. They found that inhibiting the
brain-derived neurotrophic factor reduced the population of off-target cells in kidney or-
ganoids by 90%. A random forest classiﬁer was then used to compare the organoids with
fetal and adult human kidney single-cell RNA datasets, evidencing a lack of maturation in
organoid cells. The authors went on to explore whether longer incubation could improve
cell maturation; however, this rather promoted the generation of more off-target cells,
suggesting the need to determine appropriate culturing conditions that promote orga-
noid maturation.
Figure 9. Strategies for Establishing Organs-on-Chips and Organoids
(A) Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) or differentiated cells (e.g., kidney) are seeded into a
microstructure that recapitulates the microenvironment of a minimal functional organ unit,
generally through a combination of micropatterned substrates,120 biochemical and biophysical
stimuli,112,119 and medium perfusion.122
(B) iPSC-derived organoids can be grown from isolated embryonic stem cells (ESC) or from
ﬁbroblasts reprogrammed into iPSCs.129 Different cell varieties can be obtained by selective
differentiation into organ-speciﬁc cells such as brain,134 kidney,121 or intestine.120
(C) Adult stem cell-derived organoids can be established by culturing cells derived from normal132
or tumor tissue biopsies133 obtained from the organ of interest.
ll
1910 Matter 3, 1893–1922, December 2, 2020
Review

===PAGE 20===
Machine learning has also been applied to evaluate neurotoxicity and diagnose neuro-
degenerative disorders using in vitro disease models. Monzel et al.139 established a
neurotoxin-induced Parkinson’s disease human midbrain organoid model and used ma-
chine learning to assess the neurotoxic effect of 6-hydroxydopamine, a compound that
disrupts the dopaminergic system.145 The authors treated the organoids with different
concentrations of 6-hydroxydopamine. High-content morphological screening enabled
the quantitation of dopaminergic neurons and neuronal complexity in the organoids to
obtain a dataset of image-based phenotypic cell proﬁles. Principal component analysis
revealed the contributions of the different experimental factors on the features in the da-
taset. These data were then used to train a random forest classiﬁer to predict the treat-
ment condition of the organoids as a function of the concentration of hydroxydopamine
used, achieving an accuracy of 85%. Furthermore, the authors tested the model on a da-
taset obtained from Parkinson’s disease patient-derived organoids, achieving an accu-
racy of 89%–93%. These results suggest the potential for clinical translation.
Further research on neurodegenerative disorders should integrate the analysis of
protein structures36 and DNA molecules.34 The accurate prediction of structures is
Figure 10. Characterization and Optimization of Human Pluripotent Stem Cell-Derived Kidney
Organoids
Human kidney organoids are generated through the protocols developed by Morizane and
Bonventre142 and Takasato et al.141 Cells are characterized and compared with adult human kidney
cells according to single-cell RNA sequencing and genome-wide association studies (GWAS).
Pseudotemporal ordering144 reconstructs lineage relationships to identify the transcription factors,
ligands, and receptors associated with the differentiation of induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells
into off-target types. Suppression of these factors reduces the generation of nonrenal cells.
Adapted with permission from Wu et al.138 Copyright 2018, Elsevier Inc.
ll
Matter 3, 1893–1922, December 2, 2020 1911
Review

===PAGE 21===
important because it can provide insights into the enzymatic function of proteins or
on substrate, antigen, DNA, and RNA binding. Additionally, structural abnormalities
can lead to neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer’s or Parkinson’s. Besides
the discussed emergent research, other sectors of the scientiﬁc community are
beginning to pay attention to the combination of machine learning and in vitro organ
models. Biopharmaceutical companies such as SEngine Precision Medicine and
Atomwise are betting on joint ventures to advance drug discovery and personalized
medicine by using artiﬁcial intelligence for drug screening in patient-derived orga-
noids. Funding bodies are also becoming increasingly aware of the potential of
this convergence. For example, in 2019, the Dementia Australia Research Founda-
tion and the Yulgilbar Alzheimer’s Research Program established a grant for ‘‘the
use of brain organoids and artiﬁcial intelligence for understanding dementia.’’
PERSPECTIVES
Machine intelligence provides a solid toolbox of algorithms that can solve problems
relevant to the microﬂuidics environment. Publicly available software packages are
enabling researchers to quickly build statistical models without necessitating an
expert background in programming or mathematics. Popular frameworks such as
Torch7,146 Theano,147 Caffe,148 and TensorFlow149 provide interfaces that allow
users to stack pre-existing components and modules including complete ready-
to-use neural networks or even pretrained networks, which allows the implementa-
tion of functional models in a few steps. On the other hand, microﬂuidic devices
can be quickly manufactured using simple microfabrication techniques,5 while mod-
ern tridimensional manufacturing techniques and functionalized materials permit
the construction of more complex prototypes to expand the range of applica-
tions.40,107,150 The microﬂuidics environment is highly tunable; its simpler physics
compared with macroscale systems allows the study of fundamental phenomena
within precisely controlled settings.3,151 The convergence of microﬂuidics and ma-
chine intelligence inherits the strengths from both technologies, providing a frame-
work for simultaneous high-throughput experimentation and powerful data analysis.
As a result, researchers from various backgrounds are embracing the integration of
these technologies into an increasing number of applications.
The transparency of polydimethylsiloxane permits facile optical probing. This makes
it practical to implement applications using simple and economic setups. For
instance, we have seen that an optical microscope, a camera, and modest
computing hardware already unlock many possibilities such as label-free cell and
molecule classiﬁcation,33 determination of ﬂuid properties49,52 and chemical
composition,50 or particle monitoring, microencapsulation, and various manipula-
tions.48 These emergent technologies can be readily implemented in both chemical
microreactors and organ/organoid-on-a-chip platforms.
The prediction and optimization of chemical reactions is a long-standing and com-
plex problem that impacts a variety of scientiﬁc ﬁelds in which the synthesis of mol-
ecules and materials with user-deﬁned properties is required, e.g., drug discovery,
nanomedicine, or biomaterials. Meanwhile, organs- and organoids-on-chips are
technologies with extensive opportunities for improvement that have important im-
plications in drug development, personalized and regenerative medicine, and
developmental biology. We suggest that both these technologies will greatly
beneﬁt from the adoption of data-driven intelligent microﬂuidic platforms, which
must be accompanied by the development of microscopy, spectroscopy, and multi-
sensing instrumentation speciﬁc to the microﬂuidics environment.
ll
1912 Matter 3, 1893–1922, December 2, 2020
Review

===PAGE 22===
Intelligent Microﬂuidics in Materials Discovery and Synthesis
The use of chemical microreactors with machine intelligence will not replace chem-
ists in the near term, but rather assist them in automating time-consuming, repeti-
tive, or hazardous tasks. This will allow chemists to direct their energy toward
more innovative activities. The proportion of scientists adopting machine intelli-
gence into their laboratories will increase with the appearance of highly generaliz-
able artiﬁcial neural networks that can be implemented without extensive retraining.
Progress in cloud computing and the growth of computational power will also repre-
sent main contributors. Microﬂuidics leveraging machine-intelligence algorithms are
thus expected to provide chemists with user-friendly platforms for high-throughput
experimentation that can be implemented without demanding great expertise in
machine learning to extract meaningful results.
Figure 11 depicts an intelligent microﬂuidics platform that could support microreactors
or organs/organoids-on-chips. The integration of modular components such as optical
probing, spectrometers, and microscopes can enable monitoring of a variety of reac-
tions. The resultant data can then be analyzed via machine learning to optimize and
study the contributions of experimental parameters,14,42 for example via reinforcement
learning. Mass spectrometry,42 nuclear magnetic resonance,21 Raman spectroscopy,152
or infrared spectroscopy153 can be used to monitor reactions in real time,154 while bright-
ﬁeld microscopy can be used to monitor ﬂow rates,49 ﬂuid properties,52 chemical
composition,50 or mixing.155 Other techniques must be adapted depending on the
application; for example, infrared thermography was demonstrated effectively monitor
Figure 11. Intelligent Microﬂuidic Platform
Schematic of an intelligent microﬂuidic platform including microﬂuidic chips coupled to
miniaturized instrumentation such as an in situ bio-electrochemical multisensor platform,160 optical
probing, mass spectrometry,42 spectroscopy (e.g., nuclear magnetic resonance,21 Raman,152 or
infrared),153 and microscopy (e.g., brightﬁeld or ﬂuorescent). Data are collected and analyzed using
machine learning to optimize and study experimental parameters such as solvent, reagents,
reactants, temperature, and pressure in microreactors, or biochemical (e.g., reagents, drugs, or
growth factors) and biophysical stimuli (e.g., substrate modiﬁcations,161 shear forces,112
electrical162 or optogenetic stimulation)163 in organs/organoids-on-chips.
ll
Matter 3, 1893–1922, December 2, 2020 1913
Review

===PAGE 23===
a zirconocene polymerization catalyst.14 There are efforts toward the development of
miniaturized spectrometers156 and coupling microﬂuidic chips to traditional mass spec-
trometers.157,158 However, interfacing microﬂuidic chips for real-time online analysis still
represents a challenge.159
The Necessity for Microﬂuidics-Friendly Instrumentation
The development of instrumentation speciﬁc to the microﬂuidics environment, such
as mass spectrometry, high-performance liquid chromatography, nuclear magnetic
resonance, and infrared, ultraviolet-visible, or Raman spectroscopy, could promote
the adoption of microﬂuidic chips for chemical exploration and materials synthesis.
Electrospray ionization techniques are a popular alternative; however, online moni-
toring still poses technical challenges. Meanwhile, machine learning has been
demonstrated to predict chemical composition and ﬂuid properties from simple
and inexpensive brightﬁeld microscopy. The power of applications leveraging ma-
chine intelligence with microﬂuidics will increase with the development and adop-
tion of more sophisticated spectroscopy, microscopy, and multisensing instrumen-
tation to monitor reactions on chips. Deep-learning architectures are particularly
ﬁt to make use of the large amounts of high-dimensional data that can be produced.
This could potentially contribute to the establishment of more effective reaction
representations.
Developing Modular and Reconﬁgurable Devices
The use of microﬂuidics as platforms for the study of materials synthesis and chem-
ical reactions offers unparalleled beneﬁts such as reduced reagent consumption and
precise control over the reaction conditions. However, the widespread adoption of
microﬂuidic technologies depends on the development of modular components for
single chemical operations and reconﬁgurable devices. Modular design and recon-
ﬁgurability are prerequisites for scalable systems that can easily integrate new oper-
ations to support speciﬁc reaction types on demand. Progress in the development of
discrete elements,108 novel functional substrates,107 and computer-assisted addi-
tive manufacturing150 could accelerate the development of standardized microﬂui-
dic components.
Challenges to Computer-Aided Synthesis
The mining of databases is still a valuable resource for building pretrained neural
networks that could be shared among scientiﬁc communities and be readily used
by non-experts. Additionally, these models can provide initial guesses for synthetic
routes in intelligent microreactors, reducing the quantity of experiments to be per-
formed. However, devising a non-black-box standard for meaningful representa-
tions of chemical reactivity remains an open challenge. For instance, the popular
use of forward reaction templates and expert rules has proved powerful but only
in predicting reaction types and products contained in the training sets, compro-
mising generalizability and the potential to invent new synthetic routes. Representa-
tions and algorithms based on atom mapping require a deeper understanding of
atom mapping itself, which is currently not an entirely solved problem, although
several recent molecular ﬁngerprints generated from graph data are very promising.
Nonetheless, the opportunities for novel developments on this aspect of machine
intelligence applied to chemical reactions abound.
Intelligent Microﬂuidics for the Design and Testing of Patient-Speciﬁc Therapies
and Pharmaceutical Compounds
We foresee the interconnection of microreactors and organ/organoid-on-a-chip
platforms to create closed-loop drug-design pipelines based on real-time online
ll
1914 Matter 3, 1893–1922, December 2, 2020
Review

===PAGE 24===
synthesis and screening. The synthesis parameters and drug-delivery modalities
could be ﬁne-tuned in real time (e.g., compound concentrations or chemical struc-
tures). Meanwhile, in vitro organ models could provide the feedback necessary to
assess drug effects and interactions. For example, this approach could be used to
optimize drug ratios, concentrations, timings, and compositions, based on the re-
sponses of patient-derived organs/organoids-on-chips. Current pipelines for the
design and screening of pharmaceutical compounds could be dramatically
improved, while the efﬁcacy and safety of treatments (e.g., chemotherapy) could
be evaluated more precisely before patients undergo treatment.
The Future of Organs/Organoids-on-Chips
Park et al.58 recently discussed crucial challenges to constructing more physiologi-
cally relevant organoid models, outlining the necessity to be able to control the
biochemical and biophysical microenvironment and to reduce the variability in the
production process. A few studies have proposed engineering and microfabrication
solutions to these issues.125 We propose that automated multisensor, spectroscopy,
and microscopy monitoring systems, along with the modulation of microenviron-
mental
parameters
via
machine-intelligence
data-driven
optimization,
can
contribute an essential role in overcoming some of these challenges. Figure 11 de-
picts an intelligent microﬂuidic platform where modular organs- and organoids-on-
chips can be interconnected. In this system, soluble protein biomarkers can be
measured by integrating an online in situ bio-electrochemical multisensor platform.
For example, Zhang et al.160 developed a device to monitor the soluble protein bio-
markers albumin, glutathione S-transferase a, and the cardiac biomarker creatine ki-
nase MB secreted by a liver-and-heart organoid system in response to chronic drug
administration. In addition, simple optical probing setups using light-emitting di-
odes can be used to monitor absorbance and determine a variety of metabolites
and biomarkers including glucose,164 lactate,165 pH,160 or oxygen levels.160 Other
technologies such as laser-induced ﬂuorescence detection166 and online mass spec-
trometry153,167 can be employed for real-time multianalyte detection to assess me-
dium composition, nutrient concentration, drug uptake, or physiological responses
to stimuli. The choice of techniques depends on the application; for example, Sant-
bergen et al.168 evaluated drug and toxin (verapamil and ergotamine) permeability
by coupling an intestine-on-a-chip with ultra-performance liquid chromatography
quadrupole time-of-ﬂight mass spectrometry, while the detection of an unknown
cell by-product was also demonstrated. Miniaturized microscopes can obtain
time-lapse images for cell-tracking and morphological analyses.169 Biochemical
(e.g., reagents, drugs, or growth factors) and biophysical microenvironmental pa-
rameters (e.g., substrate modiﬁcations,161 shear forces,112 electrical162 or optoge-
netic stimulation163) can be systematically modulated to evaluate physiological re-
sponses. All these data can be collected and processed using machine-learning
algorithms to study and optimize experimental parameters based on closed-loop
feedback. However, crucial challenges remain such as designing modular compo-
nents of facile assembly, developing spectrometric techniques appropriate to spe-
ciﬁc organ microenvironments, or expanding the range of biosensing elements (an-
tibodies and aptamers). These recommendations are in consideration of the
complexity of obtaining measurements in liquid phases153 or inside incubators,
and the high proportion of proteins in cell media diluting analytes of interest. Addi-
tionally, acquiring low-noise data is paramount, as current machine-learning algo-
rithms cannot compensate for insufﬁcient or low-quality data. To our knowledge,
the approach described has yet not been achieved. We believe this will unlock
many exciting applications in the study of organogenesis and enable construction
ll
Matter 3, 1893–1922, December 2, 2020 1915
Review

===PAGE 25===
of more robust and functional in vitro organ models. Moreover, the solutions to the
current challenges may not be too far down the road.
Challenges to Instrumenting Organs/Organoids-on-Chips
Organs- and organoids-on-chips can also beneﬁt from the development of specialized,
miniaturized instrumentation to interface with real-time on-chip monitoring systems. In
addition, advanced tridimensional imaging170,171 could be integrated in these systems
to obtain detailed information down to the single-cell level. The generated datasets can
then be exploited using deep convolutional neural networks for feature extraction. Op-
tical and electrochemical monitoring techniques are noninvasive and thus appropriate
for long-term operation in vitro. However, one of the challenges to instrumenting or-
gans/organoids-on-chips is to design monitoring devices resistant to fouling60 (espe-
cially for electrochemical sensors) and in small footprints, which would allow them to op-
erate in a stable manner while exposed to cell media or inside incubators.172
Organs/Organoids-on-Chips Require Tailored Algorithms
Organ- and organoid-on-a-chip platforms require tailored algorithms and pretrain-
ing strategies to prevent overﬁtting. This is because learning must take place using
few samples and within relatively short periods of training. For instance, the quantity
of data that can practically be extracted from these systems is much lower compared
with other domains (e.g., training data in Atari games could include sets of 200
million frames).173 Acquiring the same quantity of data would require years of
training at frame rates of a few hertz, which are more appropriate for monitoring bio-
logical systems. However, we believe that specialized architectures and techniques
for model regularization can readily mitigate this issue.174–177
Increasing the Lifespan and Physiological Relevance of Organoids
Long-term culture of human primary and stem cells usually results in cell death or
mutations. It has also been shown that prolonged organoid incubation does not
lead to cell maturation, but rather generates unwanted cell types.138 The cell micro-
environment is critical to retaining physiologically relevant organ functions and re-
sponses to drugs and therapies. Microﬂuidic platforms provide a means to automate
the fabrication, manipulation, and monitoring of organoids in a high-throughput
manner, while reinforcement learning can be used to establish optimal media com-
positions and dynamic culture conditions for speciﬁc cell types, potentially extend-
ing the lifespan and functionality of current in vitro organ models. Human-on-a-chip
systems could beneﬁt from this approach by selectively recirculating media with
different compositions to speciﬁc regions containing different cell varieties. For
example, light is a promising actuation stimulus that provides high spatiotemporal
control of ﬂows within microﬂuidic chips.178 Meanwhile, continuous perfusion in
complex microchannel networks could take advantage of proven algorithms to
dislodge bubbles or maintain a constant medium supply.49
Decreasing Organoid Heterogeneity
Signiﬁcant heterogeneity in organoids arises from the difﬁculty of recapitulating the self-
organizing cues that direct organogenesis. This poses a challenge to performing mean-
ingful statistical analyses and replicating research results. Additionally, highly hetero-
genic samples increase the data required to train machine-learning models and limits
their predictive capacity. In addition to geometrically deﬁned substrates,125 real-time
spectrometry168 as well as optical and electrochemical monitoring via in situ multisensor
platforms160couldhelptoreducethevariability inorganoidproductionbyoptimizingthe
biochemical and biophysical properties of the microenvironment via closed-loop rein-
forcement learning, based on multiple biomarkers (e.g., morphology, cell diversity, or
ll
1916 Matter 3, 1893–1922, December 2, 2020
Review

===PAGE 26===
secreted molecules). This approach could be used not only to optimize organoid devel-
opment but also to streamline drug screening by the integration of microreactors. How-
ever, coupling spectrometers and other instrumentation to organs-on-chips for online
measurement remains a challenge.157,159 Also, the development and assembly of multi-
sensor platforms is a laborious and highly complex process.160 The future fabrication of
miniaturizedmodular componentswillencourage their implementation byenablingtheir
facile integration into current setups.
Unraveling the Mechanisms of Organogenesis
Organoids are usually grown by manual sequential addition of growth factors to acti-
vate morphogenetic signaling pathways that contribute to the self-organization pro-
cess. The growth factor concentrations and timings are often determined empiri-
cally. Microﬂuidics can generate precise morphogen gradients179 while time-lapse
microscopy coupled to cell-tracking algorithms can be used to enable the visualiza-
tion of cell migration and differentiation.169 The combination of these technologies
with online biomarker monitoring180–182 can enable one to devise optimal spatio-
temporal morphogen concentrations that better recapitulate the process of organ-
ogenesis. Techniques to reduce the dimensionality of data64 further enable the
study of the contribution of isolated experimental factors in relation to functional
outcomes. This approach could contribute to understanding the underlying mecha-
nisms governing embryo and organ development.
Directing the Development of Speciﬁc Tissues and Organ Structures
Organoids will reach a point in development where diffusion cannot support their meta-
bolic demands, hampering their growth potential. Advances in artiﬁcial vasculature
coupledtointelligentcultureconditionscouldincreasethesizesandfunctionalityoforgan
models.For example, it is possible to establish 3D perfused vascular networks from endo-
thelial cells.123 It is also known that endogenous electric ﬁelds direct cell migration and
upregulate angiogenesis.162 In the absence of a deep understanding or the ability to con-
trol the complex processes of embryogenesis and organogenesis, we propose that the
spatiotemporal modulation of exogenous electric ﬁelds optimized via reinforcement
learning could provide an improved understanding of the construction of optimal 3D
vascular networks. Similar approaches can be employed to devise optimal mechanobio-
logical and biochemical stimuli to promote the development of other types of tissues in
organoids. We believe the proposed strategy complements current reverse-engineering
approaches by providing a framework to develop artiﬁcial biological organ models from
the bottom up. The development and adoption of intelligent microﬂuidics is expected to
strengthen our understanding and our ability to exploit the intrinsic properties of cells to
self-organize.
CONCLUSION
The synergistic combination of microﬂuidic chips and machine-learning algorithms
has created an emerging yet rapidly growing ﬁeld that promises to expand avenues
for fundamental research in the chemical and biological sciences. Both of these
ﬁelds are expected to beneﬁt from the adoption of intelligent microﬂuidic platforms.
We dared to suggest potential applications and directions for research in the hope
of inspiring researchers to explore the exciting possibilities enabled by the conver-
gence of microﬂuidics and machine intelligence.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China
(61971255),
the
Shenzhen
Science
and
Technology
Innovation
Committee
ll
Matter 3, 1893–1922, December 2, 2020 1917
Review

===PAGE 27===
(KQJSCX20180327143623167), the Tsinghua-Berkeley Shenzhen Institute (Scientiﬁc
Research Start-up Fund), and the Shenzhen Development and Reform Commission
([2017]1434).
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Conceptualization, S.M. and E.A.G.; Investigation and Writing – Original Draft,
E.A.G.; Writing – Review & Editing, E.A.G., S.M., W.T.S.H., Q.D., H.Z., and X.W.;
Funding Acquisition and Supervision, S.M.
REFERENCES
1. Manz, A., Harrison, D.J., Verpoorte, E.M.J.,
Fettinger, J.C., Paulus, A., Ludi, H., and
Widmer, H.M. (1992). Planar chips technology
for miniaturization and integration of
separation techniques into monitoring
systems—capillary electrophoresis on a chip.
J. Chromatogr. A 593, 253–258.
2. Whitesides, G.M. (2006). The origins and the
future of microﬂuidics. Nature 442, 368–373.
3. Squires, T.M., and Quake, S.R. (2005).
Microﬂuidics: ﬂuid physics at the nanoliter
scale. Rev. Mod. Phys. 77, 977–1026.
4. deMello, A.J. (2006). Control and detection of
chemical reactions in microﬂuidic systems.
Nature 442, 394–402.
5. Duffy, D.C., McDonald, J.C., Schueller, O.J.,
and Whitesides, G.M. (1998). Rapid
prototyping of microﬂuidic systems in
poly(dimethylsiloxane). Anal. Chem. 70,
4974–4984.
6. Matuła, K., Rivello, F., and Huck, W.T.S. (2020).
Single-cell analysis using droplet
microﬂuidics. Adv. Biosys. 4, 1900188.
7. Macosko, E.Z., Basu, A., Satija, R., Nemesh, J.,
Shekhar, K., Goldman, M., Tirosh, I., Bialas,
A.R., Kamitaki, N., Martersteck, E.M., et al.
(2015). Highly parallel genome-wide
expression proﬁling of individual cells using
nanoliter droplets. Cell 161, 1202–1214.
8. Klein, A.M., Mazutis, L., Akartuna, I.,
Tallapragada, N., Veres, A., Li, V., Peshkin, L.,
Weitz, D.A., and Kirschner, M.W. (2015).
Droplet barcoding for single-cell
transcriptomics applied to embryonic stem
cells. Cell 161, 1187–1201.
9. Bhatia, S.N., and Ingber, D.E. (2014).
Microﬂuidic organs-on-chips. Nat.
Biotechnol. 32, 760–772.
10. Schutgens, F., and Clevers, H. (2020). Human
organoids: tools for understanding biology
and treating diseases. Annu. Rev. Pathol. 15,
211–234.
11. Broutier, L., Mastrogiovanni, G., Verstegen,
M.M.A., Francies, H.E., Gavarro, L.M.,
Bradshaw, C.R., Allen, G.E., Arnes-Benito, R.,
Sidorova, O., Gaspersz, M.P., et al. (2017).
Human primary liver cancer-derived organoid
cultures for disease modeling and drug
screening. Nat. Med. 23, 1424–1435.
12. Kopper, O., de Witte, C.J., Lo˜ hmussaar, K.,
Valle-Inclan, J.E., Hami, N., Kester, L.,
Balgobind, A.V., Korving, J., Proost, N.,
Begthel, H., et al. (2019). An organoid
platform for ovarian cancer captures intra-
and interpatient heterogeneity. Nat. Med. 25,
838–849.
13. Shang, L.R., Fu, F.F., Cheng, Y., Wang, H., Liu,
Y.X., Zhao, Y.J., and Gu, Z.Z. (2015). Photonic
crystal microbubbles as suspension barcodes.
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 137, 15533–15539.
14. Rizkin, B.A., Shkolnik, A.S., Ferraro, N.J., and
Hartman, R.L. (2020). Combining automated
microﬂuidic experimentation with machine
learning for efﬁcient polymerization design.
Nat. Mach. Intell. 2, 200–209.
15. McCulloch, W.S., and Pitts, W. (1943). A
logical calculus of the ideas immanent in
nervous activity. Bull. Math. Biophys. 5,
115–133.
16. Rosenblatt, F. (1958). The perceptron: a
probabilistic model for information storage
and organization in the brain. Psychol. Rev.
65, 386–408.
17. Widrow, B., and Hoff, M.E. (1960). Adaptive
switching circuits. In 1960 IRE WESCON
Convention Record (IRE), pp. 96–104.
18. Krogh, A. (2008). What are artiﬁcial neural
networks? Nat. Biotechnol. 26, 195–197.
19. LeCun, Y., Bengio, Y., and Hinton, G. (2015).
Deep learning. Nature 521, 436–444.
20. Gromski, P.S., Henson, A.B., Granda, J.M.,
and Cronin, L. (2019). How to explore
chemical space using algorithms and
automation. Nat. Rev. Chem. 3, 119–128.
21. Granda, J.M., Donina, L., Dragone, V., Long,
D.L., and Cronin, L. (2018). Controlling an
organic synthesis robot with machine learning
to search for new reactivity. Nature 559,
377–381.
22. Sandfort, F., Strieth-Kalthoff, F., Ku¨ hnemund,
M., Beecks, C., and Glorius, F. (2020). A
structure-based platform for predicting
chemical reactivity. Chem 6, 1379–1390.
23. Ahneman, D.T., Estrada, J.G., Lin, S.S.,
Dreher, S.D., and Doyle, A.G. (2018).
Predicting reaction performance in C-N cross-
coupling using machine learning. Science
360, 186–190.
24. Steiner, S., Wolf, J., Glatzel, S., Andreou, A.,
Granda, J.M., Keenan, G., Hinkley, T., Aragon-
Camarasa, G., Kitson, P.J., Angelone, D., et al.
(2019). Organic synthesis in a modular robotic
system driven by a chemical programming
language. Science 363, eaav2211.
25. Segler, M.H.S., Preuss, M., and Waller, M.P.
(2018). Planning chemical syntheses with
deep neural networks and symbolic AI.
Nature 555, 604–610.
26. Segler, M.H.S., and Waller, M.P. (2017).
Neural-symbolic machine learning for
retrosynthesis and reaction prediction. Chem.
Eur. J. 23, 5966–5971.
27. Clayton, A.D., Schweidtmann, A.M., Clemens,
G., Manson, J.A., Taylor, C.J., Nino, C.G.,
Chamberlain, T.W., Kapur, N., Blacker, A.J.,
Lapkin, A.A., et al. (2020). Automated self-
optimisation of multi-step reaction and
separation processes using machine learning.
Chem. Eng. J. 384, 123340.
28. Kirman, J., Johnston, A., Kuntz, D.A., Askerka,
M., Gao, Y., Todorovic, P., Ma, D., Prive´ , G.G.,
and Sargent, E.H. (2020). Machine-learning-
accelerated perovskite crystallization. Matter
2, 938–947.
29. Voznyy, O., Levina, L., Fan, J.Z., Askerka, M.,
Jain, A., Choi, M.J., Ouellette, O., Todorovic,
P., Sagar, L.K., and Sargent, E.H. (2019).
Machine learning accelerates discovery of
optimal colloidal quantum dot synthesis. ACS
Nano 13, 11122–11128.
30. Noh, J., Kim, J., Stein, H.S., Sanchez-
Lengeling, B., Gregoire, J.M., Aspuru-Guzik,
A., and Jung, Y. (2019). Inverse design of
solid-state materials via a continuous
representation. Matter 1, 1370–1384.
31. Swanson, K., Trivedi, S., Lequieu, J., Swanson,
K., and Kondor, R. (2020). Deep learning for
automated classiﬁcation and characterization
of amorphous materials. Soft Matter 16,
435–446.
32. Blasi, T., Hennig, H., Summers, H.D., Theis,
F.J., Cerveira, J., Patterson, J.O., Davies, D.,
Filby, A., Carpenter, A.E., and Rees, P. (2016).
Label-free cell cycle analysis for high-
throughput imaging ﬂow cytometry. Nat.
Commun. 7, 10256.
33. McCallum, C., Riordon, J., Wang, Y., Kong, T.,
You, J.B., Sanner, S., Lagunov, A., Hannam,
T.G., Jarvi, K., and Sinton, D. (2019). Deep
learning-based selection of human sperm
with high DNA integrity. Commun. Biol. 2,
250.
34. Liu, Q., Fang, L., Yu, G., Wang, D., Xiao, C.-L.,
and Wang, K. (2019). Detection of DNA base
modiﬁcations by deep recurrent neural
network on oxford nanopore sequencing
data. Nat. Commun. 10, 2449.
35. Malta, T.M., Sokolov, A., Gentles, A.J.,
Burzykowski, T., Poisson, L., Weinstein, J.N.,
Kaminska, B., Huelsken, J., Omberg, L.,
Gevaert, O., et al. (2018). Machine learning
ll
1918 Matter 3, 1893–1922, December 2, 2020
Review

===PAGE 28===
identiﬁes stemness features associated with
oncogenic dedifferentiation. Cell 173,
338–354.
36. Senior, A.W., Evans, R., Jumper, J.,
Kirkpatrick, J., Sifre, L., Green, T., Qin, C.L., Z?
dek, A., Nelson, A.W.R., Bridgland, A., et al.
(2019). Protein structure prediction using
multiple deep neural networks in the 13th
critical assessment of protein structure
prediction (CASP13). Proteins 87, 1141–1148.
37. Wang, Y., Ji, M., Jiang, S., Wang, X., Wu, J.,
Duan, F., Fan, J., Huang, L., Ma, S., Fang, L.,
et al. (2020). Augmenting vascular disease
diagnosis by vasculature-aware unsupervised
learning. Nat. Mach. Intell. 2, 337–346.
38. Cheng, J., Han, Z., Mehra, R., Shao, W.,
Cheng, M., Feng, Q., Ni, D., Huang, K.,
Cheng, L., and Zhang, J. (2020).
Computational analysis of pathological
images enables a better diagnosis of TFE3
Xp11.2 translocation renal cell carcinoma.
Nat. Commun. 11, 1778.
39. Chiu, D.T., deMello, A.J., Di Carlo, D., Doyle,
P.S., Hansen, C., Maceiczyk, R.M., and
Wootton, R.C.R. (2017). Small but perfectly
formed? Successes, challenges, and
opportunities for microﬂuidics in the chemical
and biological sciences. Chem 2, 201–223.
40. Dixit, C.K., Kadimisetty, K., and Rusling, J.
(2018). 3D-Printed miniaturized ﬂuidic tools in
chemistry and biology. TrAC Trends Analyt.
Chem. 106, 37–52.
41. Mashaghi, S., Abbaspourrad, A., Weitz, D.A.,
and van Oijen, A.M. (2016). Droplet
microﬂuidics: a tool for biology, chemistry and
nanotechnology. TrAC Trends Analyt. Chem.
82, 118–125.
42. Zhou, Z.P., Li, X.C., and Zare, R.N. (2017).
Optimizing chemical reactions with deep
reinforcement learning. ACS Cent. Sci. 3,
1337–1344.
43. Isozaki, A., Mikami, H., Tezuka, H.,
Matsumura, H., Huang, K., Akamine, M.,
Hiramatsu, K., Iino, T., Ito, T., Karakawa, H.,
et al. (2020). Intelligent image-activated cell
sorting 2.0. Lab Chip 20, 2263–2273.
44. Manak, M.S., Varsanik, J.S., Hogan, B.J.,
Whitﬁeld, M.J., Su, W.R., Joshi, N., Steinke,
N., Min, A., Berger, D., Saphirstein, R.J., et al.
(2018). Live-cell phenotypic-biomarker
microﬂuidic assay for the risk stratiﬁcation of
cancer patients via machine learning. Nat.
Biomed. Eng. 2, 761–772.
45. Jiang, Y., Lei, C., Yasumoto, A., Kobayashi, H.,
Aisaka, Y., Ito, T., Guo, B., Nitta, N., Kutsuna,
N., Ozeki, Y., et al. (2017). Label-free
detection of aggregated platelets in blood by
machine-learning-aided optoﬂuidic time-
stretch microscopy. Lab Chip 17, 2426–2434.
46. Singh, D.K., Ahrens, C.C., Li, W., and
Vanapalli, S.A. (2017). Label-free, high-
throughput holographic screening and
enumeration of tumor cells in blood. Lab Chip
17, 2920–2932.
47. Ko, J., Bhagwat, N., Yee, S.S., Ortiz, N.,
Sahmoud, A., Black, T., Aiello, N.M.,
McKenzie, L., O’Hara, M., Redlinger, C., et al.
(2017). Combining machine learning and
nanoﬂuidic technology to diagnose
pancreatic cancer using exosomes. ACS
Nano 11, 11182–11193.
48. Chu, A., Nguyen, D., Talathi, S.S., Wilson,
A.C., Ye, C., Smith, W.L., Kaplan, A.D., Duoss,
E.B., Stolaroff, J.K., and Giera, B. (2019).
Automated detection and sorting of
microencapsulation via machine learning. Lab
Chip 19, 1808–1817.
49. Dressler, O.J., Howes, P.D., Choo, J., and
deMello, A.J. (2018). Reinforcement learning
for dynamic microﬂuidic control. ACS Omega
3, 10084–10091.
50. Hadikhani, P., Borhani, N., SM, H.H., and
Psaltis, D. (2019). Learning from droplet ﬂows
in microﬂuidic channels using deep neural
networks. Sci. Rep. 9, 8114.
51. Mahdi, Y., and Daoud, K. (2017). Microdroplet
size prediction in microﬂuidic systems via
artiﬁcial neural network modeling for water-
in-oil emulsion formulation. J. Disper. Sci.
Technol. 38, 1501–1508.
52. Khor, J.W., Jean, N., Luxenberg, E.S., Ermon,
S., and Tang, S.K.Y. (2019). Using machine
learning to discover shape descriptors for
predicting emulsion stability in a microﬂuidic
channel. Soft Matter 15, 1361–1372.
53. Stoecklein, D., Lore, K.G., Davies, M., Sarkar,
S., and Ganapathysubramanian, B. (2017).
Deep learning for ﬂow sculpting: insights into
efﬁcient learning using scientiﬁc simulation
data. Sci. Rep. 7, 46368.
54. Ekins, S., Puhl, A.C., Zorn, K.M., Lane, T.R.,
Russo, D.P., Klein, J.J., Hickey, A.J., and Clark,
A.M. (2019). Exploiting machine learning for
end-to-end drug discovery and development.
Nat. Mater. 18, 435–441.
55. Meredig, B. (2019). Five high-impact research
areas in machine learning for materials
science. Chem. Mater. 31, 9579–9581.
56. Lancaster, M.A., and Knoblich, J.A. (2014).
Organogenesis in a dish: modeling
development and disease using organoid
technologies. Science 345, 1247125.
57. Zhang, B.Y., Korolj, A., Lai, B.F.L., and Radisic,
M. (2018). Advances in organ-on-a-chip
engineering. Nat. Rev. Mater. 3, 257–278.
58. Park, S.E., Georgescu, A., and Huh, D. (2019).
Organoids-on-a-chip. Science 364, 960–965.
59. Goodfellow, I., Bengio, Y., and Courville, A.
(2016). Deep Learning (MIT Press).
60. Schoenitz, M., Grundemann, L., Augustin, W.,
and Scholl, S. (2015). Fouling in
microstructured devices: a review. Chem.
Commun. 51, 8213–8228.
61. Dangla, R., Gallaire, F., and Baroud, C.N.
(2010). Microchannel deformations due to
solvent-induced PDMS swelling. Lab Chip 10,
2972–2978.
62. Toepke, M.W., and Beebe, D.J. (2006). PDMS
absorption of small molecules and
consequences in microﬂuidic applications.
Lab Chip 6, 1484–1486.
63. Regehr, K.J., Domenech, M., Koepsel, J.T.,
Carver, K.C., Ellison-Zelski, S.J., Murphy, W.L.,
Schuler, L.A., Alarid, E.T., and Beebe, D.J.
(2009). Biological implications of
polydimethylsiloxane-based microﬂuidic cell
culture. Lab Chip 9, 2132–2139.
64. Hinton, G.E., and Salakhutdinov, R.R. (2006).
Reducing the dimensionality of data with
neural networks. Science 313, 504–507.
65. Mnih, V., Kavukcuoglu, K., Silver, D., Rusu,
A.A., Veness, J., Bellemare, M.G., Graves, A.,
Riedmiller, M., Fidjeland, A.K., Ostrovski, G.,
et al. (2015). Human-level control through
deep reinforcement learning. Nature 518,
529–533.
66. Blundell, C., Uria, B., Pritzel, A., Li, Y.,
Ruderman, A., Leibo, J.Z., Rae, J., Wierstra,
D., and Hassabis, D. (2016). Model-free
episodic control. arXiv 1606.04460v1
[stat.ML].
67. Sutton, R.S., and Barto, A.G. (2018).
Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction
(MIT Press).
68. Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I., and Hinton, G.E.
(2012). Imagenet classiﬁcation with deep
convolutional neural networks. Neural Info.
Process. Syst. 2, 1097–1105.
69. Ma, S.H. (2019). Engineering inverse opals
with enclosed voids via bottom-up assembly
of double emulsions. Chem. Eng. Sci. 205,
414–419.
70. Kanai, T., Nakai, H., Yamada, A., Fukuyama,
M., and Weitz, D.A. (2019). Preparation of
monodisperse hybrid gel particles with
various morphologies via ﬂow rate and
temperature control. Soft Matter 15, 6934–
6937.
71. Zhang, H.B., Cui, W.G., Qu, X.M., Wu, H.Y.,
Qu, L.L., Zhang, X., Makila, E., Salonen, J.,
Zhu, Y.Q., Yang, Z., et al. (2019).
Photothermal-responsive nanosized hybrid
polymersome as versatile therapeutics
codelivery nanovehicle for effective tumor
suppression. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 116,
7744–7749.
72. Nie, Z.H., Li, W., Seo, M., Xu, S.Q., and
Kumacheva, E. (2006). Janus and ternary
particles generated by microﬂuidic synthesis:
design, synthesis, and self-assembly. J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 128, 9408–9412.
73. Paulsen, K.S., Di Carlo, D., and Chung, A.J.
(2015). Optoﬂuidic fabrication for 3D-shaped
particles. Nat. Commun. 6, 6976.
74. Yu, Y., Shang, L., Guo, J., Wang, J., and Zhao,
Y. (2018). Design of capillary microﬂuidics for
spinning cell-laden microﬁbers. Nat. Protoc.
13, 2557–2579.
75. Chong, Z.Z., Tor, S.B., Ganan-Calvo, A.M.,
Chong, Z.J., Loh, N.H., Nguyen, N.T., and
Tan, S.H. (2016). Automated droplet
measurement (ADM): an enhanced video
processing software for rapid droplet
measurements. Microﬂuid. Nanoﬂuid. 20, 66.
76. Heo, Y.J., Kang, J., Kim, M.J., and Chung,
W.K. (2016). Tuning-free controller to
accurately regulate ﬂow rates in a microﬂuidic
network. Sci. Rep. 6, 23273.
77. Amini, H., Sollier, E., Masaeli, M., Xie, Y.,
Ganapathysubramanian, B., Stone, H.A., and
Di Carlo, D. (2013). Engineering ﬂuid ﬂow
using sequenced microstructures. Nat.
Commun. 4, 1826.
ll
Matter 3, 1893–1922, December 2, 2020 1919
Review

===PAGE 29===
78. Nunes, J.K., Wu, C.Y., Amini, H., Owsley, K., Di
Carlo, D., and Stone, H.A. (2014). Fabricating
shaped microﬁbers with inertial microﬂuidics.
Adv. Mater. 26, 3712–3717.
79. Wu, C.Y., Owsley, K., and Di Carlo, D. (2015).
Rapid software-based design and optical
transient liquid molding of microparticles.
Adv. Mater. 27, 7970–7978.
80. Sollier, E., Amini, H., Go, D.E., Sandoz, P.A.,
Owsley, K., and Di Carlo, D. (2015). Inertial
microﬂuidic programming of microparticle-
laden ﬂows for solution transfer around cells
and particles. Microﬂuid. Nanoﬂuid. 19,
53–65.
81. Rabitz, H., and Alis, O.F. (1999). General
foundations of high-dimensional model
representations. J. Math. Chem. 25, 197–233.
82. Lever, J., Krzywinski, M., and Altman, N.
(2017). Principal component analysis. Nat.
Methods 14, 641–642.
83. Brereton, R.G. (2014). A short history of
chemometrics: a personal view.
J. Chemometrics 28, 749–760.
84. Corey, E.J., and Wipke, W.T. (1969).
Computer-assisted design of complex
organic syntheses. Science 166, 178–192.
85. Satoh, H., and Funatsu, K. (1995). Sophia, a
knowledge base-guided reaction prediction
system - utilization of a knowledge-base
derived from a reaction database. J. Chem.
Inf. Comp. Sci. 35, 34–44.
86. Kayala, M.A., Azencott, C.A., Chen, J.H., and
Baldi, P. (2011). Learning to predict chemical
reactions. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 51, 2209–2222.
87. Wei, J.N., Duvenaud, D., and Aspuru-Guzik,
A. (2016). Neural networks for the prediction
of organic chemistry reactions. ACS Cent. Sci.
2, 725–732.
88. Breiman, L. (2001). Random forests. Mach.
Learn. 45, 5–32.
89. Coley, C.W., Barzilay, R., Jaakkola, T.S.,
Green, W.H., and Jensen, K.F. (2017).
Prediction of organic reaction outcomes
using machine learning. ACS Cent. Sci. 3,
434–443.
90. Segler, M.H.S., and Waller, M.P. (2017).
Modelling chemical reasoning to predict and
invent reactions. Chem. Eur. J. 23, 6118–6128.
91. Rogers, D., and Hahn, M. (2010). Extended-
connectivity ﬁngerprints. J. Chem. Inf. Model.
50, 742–754.
92. Silver, D., Huang, A., Maddison, C.J., Guez,
A., Sifre, L., van den Driessche, G.,
Schrittwieser, J., Antonoglou, I.,
Panneershelvam, V., Lanctot, M., et al. (2016).
Mastering the game of go with deep neural
networks and tree search. Nature 529,
484–489.
93. Coley, C.W., Thomas, D.A., 3rd, Lummiss,
J.A.M., Jaworski, J.N., Breen, C.P., Schultz, V.,
Hart, T., Fishman, J.S., Rogers, L., Gao, H.,
et al. (2019). A robotic platform for ﬂow
synthesis of organic compounds informed by
AI planning. Science 365, eaax1566.
94. Cortes, C., and Vapnik, V. (1995). Support-
vector networks. Mach. Learn. 20, 273–297.
95. Coomans, D., Jonckheer, M., Massart, D.L.,
Broeckaert, I., and Blockx, P. (1978). The
application of linear discriminant analysis in
the diagnosis of thyroid diseases. Anal. Chim.
Acta 103, 409–415.
96. Li, J., Tu, Y., Liu, R., Lu, Y., and Zhu, X. (2020).
Toward ‘‘on-demand’’ materials synthesis and
scientiﬁc discovery through intelligent robots.
Adv. Sci. 7, 1901957.
97. Duros, V., Grizou, J., Xuan, W., Hosni, Z.,
Long, D.L., Miras, H.N., and Cronin, L. (2017).
Human versus robots in the discovery and
crystallization of gigantic polyoxometalates.
Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 56, 10815–10820.
98. Duros, V., Grizou, J., Sharma, A., Mehr,
S.H.M., Bubliauskas, A., Frei, P., Miras, H.N.,
and Cronin, L. (2019). Intuition-enabled
machine learning beats the competition when
joint human-robot teams perform inorganic
chemical experiments. J. Chem. Inf. Model.
59, 2664–2671.
99. Yan, X., Bain, R.M., and Cooks, R.G. (2016).
Organic reactions in microdroplets: reaction
acceleration revealed by mass spectrometry.
Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 55, 12960–12972.
100. Fallah-Araghi, A., Meguellati, K., Baret, J.C.,
El Harrak, A., Mangeat, T., Karplus, M.,
Ladame, S., Marques, C.M., and Grifﬁths, A.D.
(2014). Enhanced chemical synthesis at soft
interfaces: a universal reaction-adsorption
mechanism in microcompartments. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 112, 028301.
101. Ahrberg, C.D., Wook Choi, J., and Geun
Chung, B. (2020). Automated droplet reactor
for the synthesis of iron oxide/gold core-shell
nanoparticles. Sci. Rep. 10, 1737.
102. Bezinge, L., Maceiczyk, R.M., Lignos, I.,
Kovalenko, M.V., and deMello, A.J. (2018).
Pick a color MARIA: adaptive sampling
enables the rapid identiﬁcation of complex
perovskite nanocrystal compositions with
deﬁned emission characteristics. ACS Appl.
Mater. Interfaces 10, 18869–18878.
103. Jordan, M.I. (1997). Serial order: a parallel
distributed processing approach. In Neural-
Network Models of Cognition: Biobehavioral
Foundations, vol. 121, J.W. Donahoe and M.
Dorsel, eds. Advances in Psychology
(Elsevier), pp. 471–495.
104. MacKay, D.J.C. (1992). A practical Bayesian
framework for backpropagation networks.
Neural Comput. 4, 448–472.
105. Gromski, P.S., Granda, J.M., and Cronin, L.
(2020). Universal chemical synthesis and
discovery with ‘the chemputer’. Trends Chem.
2, 4–12.
106. Unger, M.A., Chou, H.-P., Thorsen, T.,
Scherer, A., and Quake, S.R. (2000).
Monolithic microfabricated valves and pumps
by multilayer soft lithography. Science 288,
113–116.
107. Nielsen, J.B., Hanson, R.L., Almughamsi,
H.M., Pang, C., Fish, T.R., and Woolley, A.T.
(2020). Microﬂuidics: innovations in materials
and their fabrication and functionalization.
Anal. Chem. 92, 150–168.
108. Bhargava, K.C., Thompson, B., Iqbal, D., and
Malmstadt, N. (2015). Predicting the behavior
of microﬂuidic circuits made from discrete
elements. Sci. Rep. 5, 15609.
109. Zahrt, A.F., Henle, J.J., Rose, B.T., Wang, Y.,
Darrow, W.T., and Denmark, S.E. (2019).
Prediction of higher-selectivity catalysts by
computer-driven workﬂow and machine
learning. Science 363, eaau5631.
110. Beker, W., Gajewska, E.P., Badowski, T., and
Grzybowski, B.A. (2019). Prediction of major
regio-, site-, and diastereoisomers in Diels–
Alder reactions by using machine-learning:
the importance of physically meaningful
descriptors. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 58, 4515–
4519.
111. Esch, E.W., Bahinski, A., and Huh, D. (2015).
Organs-on-chips at the frontiers of drug
discovery. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 14, 248–260.
112. Benam, K.H., Villenave, R., Lucchesi, C.,
Varone, A., Hubeau, C., Lee, H.H., Alves, S.E.,
Salmon, M., Ferrante, T.C., Weaver, J.C., et al.
(2016). Small airway-on-a-chip enables
analysis of human lung inﬂammation and drug
responses in vitro. Nat. Methods 13, 151–157.
113. Riordon, J., Sovilj, D., Sanner, S., Sinton, D.,
and Young, E.W.K. (2019). Deep learning with
microﬂuidics for biotechnology. Trends
Biotechnol. 37, 310–324.
114. Issadore, D., Shao, H., Chung, J., Newton, A.,
Pittet, M., Weissleder, R., and Lee, H. (2011).
Self-assembled magnetic ﬁlter for highly
efﬁcient immunomagnetic separation. Lab
Chip 11, 147–151.
115. Lei, C., Kobayashi, H., Wu, Y., Li, M., Isozaki,
A., Yasumoto, A., Mikami, H., Ito, T., Nitta, N.,
Sugimura, T., et al. (2018). High-throughput
imaging ﬂow cytometry by optoﬂuidic time-
stretch microscopy. Nat. Protoc. 13, 1603–
1631.
116. Zheng, F., Fu, F., Cheng, Y., Wang, C., Zhao,
Y., and Gu, Z. (2016). Organ-on-a-chip
systems: microengineering to biomimic living
systems. Small 12, 2253–2282.
117. Huh, D., Leslie, D.C., Matthews, B.D., Fraser,
J.P., Jurek, S., Hamilton, G.A., Thorneloe, K.S.,
McAlexander, M.A., and Ingber, D.E. (2012). A
human disease model of drug toxicity-
induced pulmonary edema in a lung-on-a-
chip microdevice. Sci. Transl. Med. 4,
159ra147.
118. Pellegrini, L., Bonﬁo, C., Chadwick, J., Begum,
F., Skehel, M., and Lancaster, M.A. (2020).
Human CNS barrier-forming organoids with
cerebrospinal ﬂuid production. Science 369,
eaaz5626.
119. Marsano, A., Conﬁcconi, C., Lemme, M.,
Occhetta, P., Gaudiello, E., Votta, E., Cerino,
G., Redaelli, A., and Rasponi, M. (2016).
Beating heart on a chip: a novel microﬂuidic
platform to generate functional 3D cardiac
microtissues. Lab Chip 16, 599–610.
120. Workman, M.J., Mahe, M.M., Trisno, S.,
Poling, H.M., Watson, C.L., Sundaram, N.,
Chang, C.-F., Schiesser, J., Aubert, P., Stanley,
E.G., et al. (2017). Engineered human
pluripotent-stem-cell-derived intestinal
tissues with a functional enteric nervous
system. Nat. Med. 23, 49–59.
121. Schutgens, F., Rookmaaker, M.B., Margaritis,
T., Rios, A., Ammerlaan, C., Jansen, J., Gijzen,
ll
1920 Matter 3, 1893–1922, December 2, 2020
Review

===PAGE 30===
L., Vormann, M., Vonk, A., Viveen, M., et al.
(2019). Tubuloids derived from human adult
kidney and urine for personalized disease
modeling. Nat. Biotechnol. 37, 303–313.
122. Schepers, A., Li, C., Chhabra, A., Seney, B.T.,
and Bhatia, S. (2016). Engineering a
perfusable 3D human liver platform from iPS
cells. Lab Chip 16, 2644–2653.
123. Shirure, V.S., Bi, Y., Curtis, M.B., Lezia, A.,
Goedegebuure, M.M., Goedegebuure, S.P.,
Aft, R., Fields, R.C., and George, S.C. (2018).
Tumor-on-a-chip platform to investigate
progression and drug sensitivity in cell lines
and patient-derived organoids. Lab Chip 18,
3687–3702.
124. Sung, J.H., Wang, Y.I., Sriram, N.N., Jackson,
M., Long, C., Hickman, J.J., and Shuler, M.L.
(2019). Recent advances in body-on-a-chip
systems. Anal. Chem. 91, 330–351.
125. Brandenberg, N., Hoehnel, S., Kuttler, F.,
Homicsko, K., Ceroni, C., Ringel, T., Gjorevski,
N., Schwank, G., Coukos, G., Turcatti, G., et al.
(2020). High-throughput automated organoid
culture via stem-cell aggregation in
microcavity arrays. Nat. Biomed. Eng. 4,
863–874.
126. Sato, T., Vries, R.G., Snippert, H.J., van de
Wetering, M., Barker, N., Stange, D.E., van Es,
J.H., Abo, A., Kujala, P., Peters, P.J., et al.
(2009). Single Lgr5 stem cells build crypt-villus
structures in vitro without a mesenchymal
niche. Nature 459, 262–265.
127. Clevers, H. (2016). Modeling development
and disease with organoids. Cell 165, 1586–
1597.
128. Lamers, M.M., Beumer, J., van der Vaart, J.,
Knoops, K., Puschhof, J., Breugem, T.I.,
Ravelli, R.B.G., Paul van Schayck, J., Mykytyn,
A.Z., Duimel, H.Q., et al. (2020). SARS-CoV-2
productively infects human gut enterocytes.
Science 369, 50–54.
129. Lancaster, M.A., Renner, M., Martin, C.-A.,
Wenzel, D., Bicknell, L.S., Hurles, M.E.,
Homfray, T., Penninger, J.M., Jackson, A.P.,
and Knoblich, J.A. (2013). Cerebral organoids
model human brain development and
microcephaly. Nature 501, 373–379.
130. Ghatak, S., Dolatabadi, N., Trudler, D., Zhang,
X., Wu, Y., Mohata, M., Ambasudhan, R.,
Talantova, M., and Lipton, S.A. (2019).
Mechanisms of hyperexcitability in
alzheimer’s disease hiPSC-derived neurons
and cerebral organoids vs isogenic controls.
Elife 8, e50333.
131. Sampaziotis, F., Justin, A.W., Tysoe, O.C.,
Sawiak, S., Godfrey, E.M., Upponi, S.S.,
Gieseck, R.L., de Brito, M.C., Berntsen, N.L.,
Gomez-Vazquez, M.J., et al. (2017).
Reconstruction of the mouse extrahepatic
biliary tree using primary human extrahepatic
cholangiocyte organoids. Nat. Med. 23,
954–963.
132. Hu, H., Gehart, H., Artegiani, B., C, L.O.-I.,
Dekkers, F., Basak, O., van Es, J., Chuva de
Sousa Lopes, S.M., Begthel, H., Korving, J.,
et al. (2018). Long-term expansion of
functional mouse and human hepatocytes as
3D organoids. Cell 175, 1591–1606.
133. Sachs, N., de Ligt, J., Kopper, O., Gogola, E.,
Bounova, G., Weeber, F., Balgobind, A.V.,
Wind, K., Gracanin, A., Begthel, H., et al.
(2018). A living biobank of breast cancer
organoids captures disease heterogeneity.
Cell 172, 373–386.
134. Velasco, S., Kedaigle, A.J., Simmons, S.K.,
Nash, A., Rocha, M., Quadrato, G., Paulsen,
B., Nguyen, L., Adiconis, X., Regev, A., et al.
(2019). Individual brain organoids
reproducibly form cell diversity of the human
cerebral cortex. Nature 570, 523–527.
135. Ooft, S.N., Weeber, F., Dijkstra, K.K., McLean,
C.M., Kaing, S., van Werkhoven, E., Schipper,
L., Hoes, L., Vis, D.J., van de Haar, J., et al.
(2019). Patient-derived organoids can predict
response to chemotherapy in metastatic
colorectal cancer patients. Sci. Transl. Med.
11, eaay2574.
136. Wikswo, J.P., Block, F.E., 3rd, Cliffel, D.E.,
Goodwin, C.R., Marasco, C.C., Markov, D.A.,
McLean, D.L., McLean, J.A., McKenzie, J.R.,
Reiserer, R.S., et al. (2013). Engineering
challenges for instrumenting and controlling
integrated organ-on-chip systems. IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng. 60, 682–690.
137. Clevers, H., Lancaster, M.A., and Takebe, T.
(2017). Q&A: Advances in organoid
technology: Hans Clevers, Madeline
Lancaster, and Takanori Takebe. Cell Stem
Cell 20, 759–762.
138. Wu, H., Uchimura, K., Donnelly, E.L., Kirita, Y.,
Morris, S.A., and Humphreys, B.D. (2018).
Comparative analysis and reﬁnement of
human PSC-derived kidney organoid
differentiation with single-cell
transcriptomics. Cell Stem Cell 23, 869–
881.e868.
139. Monzel, A.S., Hemmer, K., Kaoma, T., Smits,
L.M., Bolognin, S., Lucarelli, P., Rosety, I.,
Zagare, A., Antony, P., Nickels, S.L., et al.
(2020). Machine learning-assisted
neurotoxicity prediction in human midbrain
organoids. Parkinsonism Relat. Disord. 75,
105–109.
140. Quadrato, G., Nguyen, T., Macosko, E.Z.,
Sherwood, J.L., Min Yang, S., Berger, D.R.,
Maria, N., Scholvin, J., Goldman, M., Kinney,
J.P., et al. (2017). Cell diversity and network
dynamics in photosensitive human brain
organoids. Nature 545, 48–53.
141. Takasato, M., Er, P.X., Chiu, H.S., and Little,
M.H. (2016). Generation of kidney organoids
from human pluripotent stem cells. Nat.
Protoc. 11, 1681–1692.
142. Morizane, R., and Bonventre, J.V. (2017).
Generation of nephron progenitor cells and
kidney organoids from human pluripotent
stem cells. Nat. Protoc. 12, 195–207.
143. Lan, F., Demaree, B., Ahmed, N., and Abate,
A.R. (2017). Single-cell genome sequencing at
ultra-high-throughput with microﬂuidic
droplet barcoding. Nat. Biotechnol. 35,
640–646.
144. Qiu, X., Mao, Q., Tang, Y., Wang, L., Chawla,
R., Pliner, H.A., and Trapnell, C. (2017).
Reversed graph embedding resolves
complex single-cell trajectories. Nat.
Methods 14, 979–982.
145. Ungerstedt, U. (1968). 6-Hydroxy-Dopamine
induced degeneration of central monoamine
neurons. Eur. J. Pharmacol. 5, 107–110.
146. Collobert, R., Kavukcuoglu, K., and Farabet,
C. (2011). Torch7: a Matlab-like Environment
for Machine Learning. In BigLearn, NIPS
Workshop.
147. Bastien, F., Lamblin, P., Pascanu, R., Bergstra,
J., Goodfellow, I., Bergeron, A., Bouchard, N.,
Warde-Farley, D., and Bengio, Y. (2012).
Theano: new features and speed
improvements. arXiv 1211.5590v1 [cs.SC].
148. Jia, Y.Q., Shelhamer, E., Donahue, J., Karayev,
S., Long, J., Girshick, R., Guadarrama, S., and
Darrell, T. (2014). Caffe: Convolutional
Architecture for Fast Feature Embedding. In
Proceedings of the 22nd ACM International
Conference on Multimedia (ACM),
pp. 675–678.
149. Abadi, M., Agarwal, A., Barham, P., Brevdo,
E., Chen, Z., Citro, C., Corrado, G.S., Davis, A.,
Dean, J., Devin, M., et al. (2016). Tensorﬂow:
large-scale machine learning on
heterogeneous distributed systems. arXiv
1603.04467v2 [cs.DC].
150. Naderi, A., Bhattacharjee, N., and Folch, A.
(2019). Digital manufacturing for microﬂuidics.
Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng. 21, 325–364.
151. Dressler, O.J., Solvas, X.C.I., and deMello,
A.J. (2017). Chemical and biological dynamics
using droplet-based microﬂuidics. Annu. Rev.
Anal. Chem. 10, 1–24.
152. Meier, T.A., Beulig, R.J., Klinge, E., Fuss, M.,
Ohla, S., and Belder, D. (2015). On-chip
monitoring of chemical syntheses in
microdroplets via surface-enhanced Raman
spectroscopy. Chem. Commun. 51, 8588–
8591.
153. Loutherback, K., Chen, L., and Holman, H.Y.
(2015). Open-channel microﬂuidic membrane
device for long-term FT-IR spectromicroscopy
of live adherent cells. Anal. Chem. 87, 4601–
4606.
154. Blanazs, A., Bristow, T.W.T., Coombes, S.R.,
Corry, T., Nunn, M., and Ray, A.D. (2017).
Coupling and optimisation of online nuclear
magnetic resonance spectroscopy and mass
spectrometry for process monitoring to cover
the broad range of process concentration.
Magn. Reson. Chem. 55, 274–282.
155. Huebner, A.M., Abell, C., Huck, W.T.S.,
Baroud, C.N., and Hollfelder, F. (2011).
Monitoring a reaction at submillisecond
resolution in picoliter volumes. Anal. Chem.
83, 1462–1468.
156. Tang, Y., Xu, Q., Li, D., and Xu, W. (2020). A
mini mass spectrometer with a low noise
faraday detector. Analyst 145, 3892–3898.
157. Wang, X., Yi, L., Mukhitov, N., Schrell, A.M.,
Dhumpa, R., and Roper, M.G. (2015).
Microﬂuidics-to-mass spectrometry: a review
of coupling methods and applications.
J. Chromatogr. A 1382, 98–116.
158. Oedit, A., Vulto, P., Ramautar, R., Lindenburg,
P.W., and Hankemeier, T. (2015). Lab-on-a-
chip hyphenation with mass spectrometry:
strategies for bioanalytical applications. Curr.
Opin. Biotechnol. 31, 79–85.
159. Gao, D., Liu, H., Jiang, Y., and Lin, J.-M. (2013).
Recent advances in microﬂuidics combined
with mass spectrometry: technologies and
applications. Lab Chip 13, 3309–3322.
ll
Matter 3, 1893–1922, December 2, 2020 1921
Review

===PAGE 31===
160. Zhang, Y.S., Aleman, J., Shin, S.R., Kilic, T.,
Kim, D., Mousavi Shaegh, S.A., Massa, S.,
Riahi, R., Chae, S., Hu, N., et al. (2017).
Multisensor-integrated organs-on-chips
platform for automated and continual in situ
monitoring of organoid behaviors. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 114, E2293–E2302.
161. Discher, D.E., Janmey, P., and Wang, Y.L.
(2005). Tissue cells feel and respond to the
stiffness of their substrate. Science 310, 1139–
1143.
162. Song, B., Gu, Y., Pu, J., Reid, B., Zhao, Z., and
Zhao, M. (2007). Application of direct current
electric ﬁelds to cells and tissues in vitro and
modulation of wound electric ﬁeld in vivo.
Nat. Protoc. 2, 1479–1489.
163. Steinbeck, J.A., Jaiswal, M.K., Calder, E.L.,
Kishinevsky, S., Weishaupt, A., Toyka, K.V.,
Goldstein, P.A., and Studer, L. (2016).
Functional connectivity under optogenetic
control allows modeling of human
neuromuscular disease. Cell Stem Cell 18,
134–143.
164. Hassan, S.-u., Nightingale, A.M., and Niu, X.
(2016). Continuous measurement of
enzymatic kinetics in droplet ﬂow for point-of-
care monitoring. Analyst 141, 3266–3273.
165. Leong, C.L., Coleman, S., Nightingale, A.M.,
Hassan, S.-u., Voegeli, D., Boutelle, M.G., and
Niu, X. (2019). Lactate monitoring in droplet
microﬂuidics: a cautionary tale in assay
miniaturisation. Anal. Methods 11, 6119–6123.
166. Tovar, M., Hengoju, S., Weber, T., Mahler, L.,
Choudhary, M., Becker, T., and Roth, M.
(2019). One sensor for multiple colors:
ﬂuorescence analysis of microdroplets in
microbiological screenings by frequency-
division multiplexing. Anal. Chem. 91, 3055–
3061.
167. Mao, S., Zhang, J., Li, H., and Lin, J.-M. (2013).
Strategy for signaling molecule detection by
using an integrated microﬂuidic device
coupled with mass spectrometry to study cell-
to-cell communication. Anal. Chem. 85,
868–876.
168. Santbergen, M.J.C., van der Zande, M.,
Gerssen, A., Bouwmeester, H., and Nielen,
M.W.F. (2020). Dynamic in vitro intestinal
barrier model coupled to chip-based liquid
chromatography mass spectrometry for oral
bioavailability studies. Anal. Bioanal. Chem.
412, 1111–1122.
169. Mencattini, A., Mattei, F., Schiavoni, G.,
Gerardino, A., Businaro, L., Di Natale, C., and
Martinelli, E. (2019). From petri dishes to
organ on chip platform: the increasing
importance of machine learning and image
analysis. Front. Pharmacol. 10, 100.
170. Galland, R., Grenci, G., Aravind, A., Viasnoff,
V., Studer, V., and Sibarita, J.B. (2015). 3D
high- and super-resolution imaging using
single-objective SPIM. Nat. Methods 12,
641–644.
171. Inavalli, V., Lenz, M.O., Butler, C., Angibaud,
J., Compans, B., Levet, F., Tonnesen, J.,
Rossier, O., Giannone, G., Thoumine, O., et al.
(2019). A super-resolution platform for
correlative live single-molecule imaging and
STED microscopy. Nat. Methods 16, 1263–
1268.
172. Santbergen, M.J.C., van Der Zande, M.,
Bouwmeester, H., and Nielen, M.W.F. (2019).
Online and in situ analysis of organs-on-a-
chip. TrAC Trends Analyt. Chem. 115,
138–146.
173. van Hasselt, H., Guez, A., and Silver, D. (2016).
Deep reinforcement learning with double Q-
learning. In Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI
Press), pp. 2094–2100.
174. Srivastava, N., Hinton, G., Krizhevsky, A.,
Sutskever, I., and Salakhutdinov, R. (2014).
Dropout: a simple way to prevent neural
networks from overﬁtting. J. Mach. Learn. Res.
15, 1929–1958.
175. Salakhutdinov, R., and Hinton, G. (2012). An
efﬁcient learning procedure for deep
Boltzmann machines. Neural Comput. 24,
1967–2006.
176. Bengio, Y. (2012). Practical Recommendations
for Gradient-Based Training of Deep
Architectures (Springer).
177. Bengio, Y., Lanblin, P., Popovici, D., and
Larochelle, H. (2007). Greedy layer-wise
training of deep networks. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems 19
(NIPS 2006), B. Scho¨ lkopf, J.C. Platt, and T.
Hoffman, eds. (MIT Press), pp. 153–160.
178. Baigl, D. (2012). Photo-actuation of liquids for
light-driven microﬂuidics: state of the art and
perspectives. Lab Chip 12, 3637–3653.
179. Manfrin, A., Tabata, Y., Paquet, E.R., Vuaridel,
A.R., Rivest, F.R., Naef, F., and Lutolf, M.P.
(2019). Engineered signaling centers for the
spatially controlled patterning of human
pluripotent stem cells. Nat. Methods 16,
640–648.
180. Lin, X., Chen, Q., Liu, W., Zhang, J., Wang, S.,
Lin, Z., and Lin, J.-M. (2015). Oxygen-induced
cell migration and on-line monitoring
biomarkers modulation of cervical cancers on
a microﬂuidic system. Sci. Rep. 5, 9643.
181. Zhang, W., He, Z., Yi, L., Mao, S., Li, H., and
Lin, J.-M. (2018). A dual-functional microﬂuidic
chip for on-line detection of interleukin-8
based on rolling circle ampliﬁcation. Biosens.
Bioelectron. 102, 652–660.
182. Shin, S.R., Zhang, Y.S., Kim, D.-J., Manbohi,
A., Avci, H., Silvestri, A., Aleman, J., Hu, N.,
Kilic, T., Keung, W., et al. (2016). Aptamer-
based microﬂuidic electrochemical biosensor
for monitoring cell-secreted trace cardiac
biomarkers. Anal. Chem. 88, 10019–10027.
ll
1922 Matter 3, 1893–1922, December 2, 2020
Review